"Republic Act No. 8293" -
"Republic Act No. 8293 June 6, 1997 AN ACT PRESCRIBING THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY CODE AND ESTABLISHING THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY OFFICE, PROVIDING FOR ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled: PART I THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY OFFICE Section 1. Title. - This Act shall be known as the "Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines." Section 2. Declaration of State Policy. - The State recognizes that an effective intellectual and industrial property system is vital to the development of domestic and creative activity, facilitates transfer of technology, attracts foreign investments, and ensures market access for our products. It shall protect and secure the exclusive rights of scientists, inventors, artists and other gifted citizens to their intellectual property and creations, particularly when beneficial to the people, for such periods as provided in this Act. The use of intellectual property bears a social function. To this end, the State shall promote the diffusion of knowledge and information for the promotion of national development and progress and the common good. It is also the policy of the State to streamline administrative procedures of registering patents, trademarks and copyright, to liberalize the registration on the transfer of technology, and to enhance the enforcement of intellectual property rights in the Philippines. (n) Section 3. International Conventions and Reciprocity. - Any person who is a national or who is domiciled or has a real and effective industrial establishment in a country which is a party to any convention, treaty or agreement relating to intellectual property rights or the repression of unfair competition, to which the Philippines is also a party, or extends reciprocal rights to nationals of the Philippines by law, shall be entitled to benefits to the extent necessary to give effect to any provision of such convention, treaty or reciprocal law, in addition to the rights to which any owner of an intellectual property right is otherwise entitled by this Act. (n) Section 4. Definitions. - 4.1. The term "intellectual property rights" consists of: a) Copyright and Related Rights; b) Trademarks and Service Marks; c) Geographic Indications; d) Industrial Designs; e) Patents; f) Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits; and g) Protection of Undisclosed Information (n, TRIPS). 4.2. The term "technology transfer arrangements" refers to contracts or agreements involving the transfer of systematic knowledge for the manufacture of a product, the application of a process, or rendering of a service including management contracts; and the transfer, assignment or licensing of all forms of intellectual property rights, including licensing of computer software except computer software developed for mass market. 4.3. The term "Office" refers to the Intellectual Property Office created by this Act. 4.4. The term "IPO Gazette" refers to the gazette published by the Office under this Act. (n) Section 5. Functions of the Intellectual Property Office (IPO). - 5.1. To administer and implement the State policies declared in this Act, there is hereby created the Intellectual Property Office (IPO) which shall have the following functions: a) Examine applications for grant of letters patent for inventions and register utility models and industrial designs; b) Examine applications for the registration of marks, geographic indication, integrated circuits; c) Register technology transfer arrangements and settle disputes involving technology transfer payments covered by the provisions of Part II, Chapter IX on Voluntary Licensing and develop and implement strategies to promote and facilitate technology transfer; d) Promote the use of patent information as a tool for technology development; e) Publish regularly in its own publication the patents, marks, utility models and industrial designs, issued and approved, and the technology transfer arrangements registered; f) Administratively adjudicate contested proceedings affecting intellectual property rights; and g) Coordinate with other government agencies and the private sector efforts to formulate and implement plans and policies to strengthen the protection of intellectual property rights in the country. 5.2. The Office shall have custody of all records, books, drawings, specifications, documents, and other papers and things relating to intellectual property rights applications filed with the Office. (n) Section 6. The Organizational Structure of the IPO. - 6.1. The Office shall be headed by a Director General who shall be assisted by two (2) Deputies Director General. 6.2. The Office shall be divided into six (6) Bureaus, each of which shall be headed by a Director and assisted by an Assistant Director. These Bureaus are: a) The Bureau of Patents; b) The Bureau of Trademarks; c) The Bureau of Legal Affairs; d) The Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau; e) The Management Information System and EDP Bureau; and f) The Administrative, Financial and Personnel Services Bureau. 6.3. The Director General, Deputies Director General, Directors and Assistant Directors shall be appointed by the President, and the other officers and employees of the Office by the Secretary of Trade and Industry, conformably with and under the Civil Service Law. (n) Section 7. The Director General and Deputies Director General. - 7.1. Functions. - The Director General shall exercise the following powers and functions: a) Manage and direct all functions and activities of the Office, including the promulgation of rules and regulations to implement the objectives, policies, plans, programs and projects of the Office: Provided, That in the exercise of the authority to propose policies and standards in relation to the following: (1) the effective, efficient, and economical operations of the Office requiring statutory enactment; (2) coordination with other agencies of government in relation to the enforcement of intellectual property rights; (3) the recognition of attorneys, agents, or other persons representing applicants or other parties before the Office; and (4) the establishment of fees for the filing and processing of an application for a patent, utility model or industrial design or mark or a collective mark, geographic indication and other marks of ownership, and for all other services performed and materials furnished by the Office, the Director General shall be subject to the supervision of the Secretary of Trade and Industry; b) Exercise exclusive appellate jurisdiction over all decisions rendered by the Director of Legal Affairs, the Director of Patents, the Director of Trademarks, and the Director of the Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau. The decisions of the Director General in the exercise of his appellate jurisdiction in respect of the decisions of the Director of Patents, and the Director of Trademarks shall be appealable to the Court of Appeals in accordance with the Rules of Court; and those in respect of the decisions of the Director of Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau shall be appealable to the Secretary of Trade and Industry; and c) Exercise original jurisdiction to resolve disputes relating to the terms of a license involving the author's right to public performance or other communication of his work. The decisions of the Director General in these cases shall be appealable to the Secretary of Trade and Industry. 7.2. Qualifications. - The Director General and the Deputies Director General must be natural born citizens of the Philippines, at least thirty-five (35) years of age on the day of their appointment, holders of a college degree, and of proven competence, integrity, probity and independence: Provided, That the Director General and at least one (1) Deputy Director General shall be members of the Philippine Bar who have engaged in the practice of law for at least ten (10) years: Provided further, That in the selection of the Director General and the Deputies Director General, consideration shall be given to such qualifications as would result, as far as practicable, in the balanced representation in the Directorate General of the various fields of intellectual property. 7.3. Term of Office. - The Director General and the Deputies Director General shall be appointed by the President for a term of five (5) years and shall be eligible for reappointment only once: Provided, That the first Director General shall have a first term of seven (7) years. Appointment to any vacancy shall be only for the unexpired term of the predecessor. 7.4. The Office of the Director General. - The Office of the Director General shall consist of the Director General and the Deputies Director General, their immediate staff and such Offices and Services that the Director General will set up to support directly the Office of the Director General. (n) Section 8. The Bureau of Patents. - The Bureau of Patents shall have the following functions: 8.1. Search and examination of patent applications and the grant of patents; 8.2. Registration of utility models, industrial designs, and integrated circuits; and 8.3. Conduct studies and researches in the field of patents in order to assist the Director General in formulating policies on the administration and examination of patents. (n) Section 9. The Bureau of Trademarks. - The Bureau of Trademarks shall have the following functions: 9.1. Search and examination of the applications for the registration of marks, geographic indications and other marks of ownership and the issuance of the certificates of registration; and 9.2. Conduct studies and researches in the field of trademarks in order to assist the Director General in formulating policies on the administration and examination of trademarks. (n) Section 10. The Bureau of Legal Affairs. - The Bureau of Legal Affairs shall have the following functions: 10.1. Hear and decide opposition to the application for registration of marks; cancellation of trademarks; subject to the provisions of Section 64, cancellation of patents, utility models, and industrial designs; and petitions for compulsory licensing of patents; 10.2. (a) Exercise original jurisdiction in administrative complaints for violations of laws involving intellectual property rights: Provided, That its jurisdiction is limited to complaints where the total damages claimed are not less than Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000): Provided further, That availment of the provisional remedies may be granted in accordance with the Rules of Court. The Director of Legal Affairs shall have the power to hold and punish for contempt all those who disregard orders or writs issued in the course of the proceedings. (n) (b) After formal investigation, the Director for Legal Affairs may impose one (1) or more of the following administrative penalties: (i) The issuance of a cease and desist order which shall specify the acts that the respondent shall cease and desist from and shall require him to submit a compliance report within a reasonable time which shall be fixed in the order; (ii) The acceptance of a voluntary assurance of compliance or discontinuance as may be imposed. Such voluntary assurance may include one or more of the following: (1) An assurance to comply with the provisions of the intellectual property law violated; (2) An assurance to refrain from engaging in unlawful and unfair acts and practices subject of the formal investigation; (3) An assurance to recall, replace, repair, or refund the money value of defective goods distributed in commerce; and (4) An assurance to reimburse the complainant the expenses and costs incurred in prosecuting the case in the Bureau of Legal Affairs. The Director of Legal Affairs may also require the respondent to submit periodic compliance reports and file a bond to guarantee compliance of his undertaking; (iii) The condemnation or seizure of products which are subject of the offense. The goods seized hereunder shall be disposed of in such manner as may be deemed appropriate by the Director of Legal Affairs, such as by sale, donation to distressed local governments or to charitable or relief institutions, exportation, recycling into other goods, or any combination thereof, under such guidelines as he may provide; (iv) The forfeiture of paraphernalia and all real and personal properties which have been used in the commission of the offense; (v) The imposition of administrative fines in such amount as deemed reasonable by the Director of Legal Affairs, which shall in no case be less than Five thousand pesos (P5,000) nor more than One hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000). In addition, an additional fine of not more than One thousand pesos (P1,000) shall be imposed for each day of continuing violation; (vi) The cancellation of any permit, license, authority, or registration which may have been granted by the Office, or the suspension of the validity thereof for such period of time as the Director of Legal Affairs may deem reasonable which shall not exceed one (1) year; (vii) The withholding of any permit, license, authority, or registration which is being secured by the respondent from the Office; (viii) The assessment of damages; (ix) Censure; and (x) Other analogous penalties or sanctions. (Secs. 6, 7, 8, and 9, Executive Order No. 913 [1983]a) 10.3. The Director General may by Regulations establish the procedure to govern the implementation of this Section. (n) Section 11. The Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau. - The Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau shall have the following functions: 11.1. Support the search and examination activities of the Office through the following activities: (a) Maintain and upkeep classification systems whether they be national or international such as the International Patent Classification (IPC) system; (b) Provide advisory services for the determination of search patterns; (c) Maintain search files and search rooms and reference libraries; and (d) Adapt and package industrial property information. 11.2. Establish networks or intermediaries or regional representatives; 11.3. Educate the public and build awareness on intellectual property through the conduct of seminars and lectures, and other similar activities; 11.4. Establish working relations with research and development institutions as well as with local and international intellectual property professional groups and the like; 11.5. Perform state-of-the-art searches; 11.6. Promote the use of patent information as an effective tool to facilitate the development of technology in the country; 11.7. Provide technical, advisory, and other services relating to the licensing and promotion of technology, and carry out an efficient and effective program for technology transfer; and 11.8. Register technology transfer arrangements, and settle disputes involving technology transfer payments. (n) Section 12. The Management Information Services and EDP Bureau. - The Management Information Services and EDP Bureau shall: 12.1. Conduct automation planning, research and development, testing of systems, contracts with firms, contracting, purchase and maintenance of equipment, design and maintenance of systems, user consultation, and the like; and 12.2. Provide management information support and service to the Office. (n) Section 13. The Administrative, Financial and Human Resource Development Service Bureau. - 13.1. The Administrative Service shall: (a) Provide services relative to procurement and allocation of supplies and equipment, transportation, messengerial work, cashiering, payment of salaries and other Office's obligations, office maintenance, proper safety and security, and other utility services; and comply with government regulatory requirements in the areas of performance appraisal, compensation and benefits, employment records and reports; (b) Receive all applications filed with the Office and collect fees therefor, and (c) Publish patent applications and grants, trademark applications, and registration of marks, industrial designs, utility models, geographic indication, and lay-out-designs of integrated circuits registrations. 13.2. The Patent and Trademark Administration Services shall perform the following functions among others: (a) Maintain registers of assignments, mergings, licenses, and bibliographic on patents and trademarks; (b) Collect maintenance fees, issue certified copies of documents in its custody and perform similar other activities; and (c) Hold in custody all the applications filed with the office, and all patent grants, certificate of registrations issued by the office, and the like. 13.3. The Financial Service shall formulate and manage a financial program to ensure availability and proper utilization of funds; provide for an effective monitoring system of the financial operations of the Office; and 13.4. The Human Resource Development Service shall design and implement human resource development plans and programs for the personnel of the Office; provide for present and future manpower needs of the organization; maintain high morale and favorable employee attitudes towards the organization through the continuing design and implementation of employee development programs. (n) Section 14. Use of Intellectual Property Rights Fees by the IPO. - 14.1. For a more effective and expeditious implementation of this Act, the Director General shall be authorized to retain, without need of a separate approval from any government agency, and subject only to the existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations, all the fees, fines, royalties and other charges, collected by the Office under this Act and the other laws that the Office will be mandated to administer, for use in its operations, like upgrading of its facilities, equipment outlay, human resource development, and the acquisition of the appropriate office space, among others, to improve the delivery of its services to the public. This amount, which shall be in addition to the Office's annual budget, shall be deposited and maintained in a separate account or fund, which may be used or disbursed directly by the Director General. 14.2. After five (5) years from the coming into force of this Act, the Director General shall, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Trade and Industry, determine if the fees and charges mentioned in Subsection 14.1 hereof that the Office shall collect are sufficient to meet its budgetary requirements. If so, it shall retain all the fees and charges it shall collect under the same conditions indicated in said Subsection 14.1 but shall forthwith, cease to receive any funds from the annual budget of the National Government; if not, the provisions of said Subsection 14.1 shall continue to apply until such time when the Director General, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Trade and Industry, certifies that the above-stated fees and charges the Office shall collect are enough to fund its operations. (n) Section 15. Special Technical and Scientific Assistance. - The Director General is empowered to obtain the assistance of technical, scientific or other qualified officers and employees of other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including corporations owned, controlled or operated by the Government, when deemed necessary in the consideration of any matter submitted to the Office relative to the enforcement of the provisions of this Act. (Sec. 3, R.A. No. 165a) Section 16. Seal of Office. - The Office shall have a seal, the form and design of which shall be approved by the Director General. (Sec. 4, R.A. No. 165a) Section 17. Publication of Laws and Regulations. - The Director General shall cause to be printed and make available for distribution, pamphlet copies of this Act, other pertinent laws, executive orders and information circulars relating to matters within the jurisdiction of the Office. (Sec. 5, R.A. No. 165a) Section 18. The IPO Gazette. - All matters required to be published under this Act shall be published in the Office's own publication to be known as the IPO Gazette. (n) Section 19. Disqualification of Officers and Employees of the Office. - All officers and employees of the Office shall not apply or act as an attorney or patent agent of an application for a grant of patent, for the registration of a utility model, industrial design or mark nor acquire, except by hereditary succession, any patent or utility model, design registration, or mark or any right, title or interest therein during their employment and for one (1) year thereafter. (Sec. 77, R.A. No. 165a) PART II THE LAW ON PATENTS CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Section 20. Definition of Terms Used in Part II, The Law on Patents. - As used in Part II, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 20.1. "Bureau" means the Bureau of Patents, 20.2. "Director" means the Director of Patents; 20.3. "Regulations" means the Rules of Practice in Patent Cases formulated by the Director of Patents and promulgated by the Director General; 20.4. "Examiner" means the patent examiner; 20.5. "Patent application" or "application" means an application for a patent for an invention except in Chapters XII and XIII, where "application" means an application for a utility model and an industrial design, respectively; and 20.6. "Priority date" means the date of filing of the foreign application for the same invention referred to in Section 31 of this Act. (n) CHAPTER II PATENTABILITY Section 21. Patentable Inventions. - Any technical solution of a problem in any field of human activity which is new, involves an inventive step and is industrially applicable shall be Patentable. It may be, or may relate to, a product, or process, or an improvement of any of the foregoing. (Sec. 7, R.A. No. 165a) Section 22. Non-Patentable Inventions. - The following shall be excluded from patent protection: 22.1. Discoveries, scientific theories and mathematical methods; 22.2. Schemes, rules and methods of performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and programs for computers; 22.3. Methods for treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy and diagnostic methods practiced on the human or animal body. This provision shall not apply to products and composition for use in any of these methods; 22.4. Plant varieties or animal breeds or essentially biological process for the production of plants or animals. This provision shall not apply to micro-organisms and non-biological and microbiological processes. Provisions under this subsection shall not preclude Congress to consider the enactment of a law providing sui generis protection of plant varieties and animal breeds and a system of community intellectual rights protection: 22.5. Aesthetic creations; and 22.6. Anything which is contrary to public order or morality. (Sec. 8, R.A. No. 165a) Section 23. Novelty. . - An invention shall not be considered new if it forms part of a prior art. (Sec. 9, R.A. No. 165a) Section 24. Prior Art. - Prior art shall consist of: 24.1. Everything which has been made available to the public anywhere in the world, before the filing date or the priority date of the application claiming the invention; and 24.2. The whole contents of an application for a patent, utility model, or industrial design registration, published in accordance with this Act, filed or effective in the Philippines, with a filing or priority date that is earlier than the filing or priority date of the application: Provided, That the application which has validly claimed the filing date of an earlier application under Section 31 of this Act, shall be prior art with effect as of the filing date of such earlier application: Provided further, That the applicant or the inventor identified in both applications are not one and the same. (Sec. 9, R.A. No. 165a) Section 25. Non-Prejudicial Disclosure. . - 25.1. The disclosure of information contained in the application during the twelve (12) months preceding the filing date or the priority date of the application shall not prejudice the applicant on the ground of lack of novelty if such disclosure was made by: (a) The inventor; (b) A patent office and the information was contained (a) in another application filed by the inventor and should not have been disclosed by the office, or (b) in an application filed without the knowledge or consent of the inventor by a third party which obtained the information directly or indirectly from the inventor; or (c) A third party which obtained the information directly or indirectly from the inventor. 25.2. For the purposes of Subsection 25.1, "inventor" also means any person who, at the filing date of application, had the right to the patent. (n) Section 26. Inventive Step. - An invention involves an inventive step if, having regard to prior art, it is not obvious to a person skilled in the art at the time of the filing date or priority date of the application claiming the invention. (n) Section 27. Industrial Applicability. - An invention that can be produced and used in any industry shall be industrially applicable. (n) CHAPTER III RIGHT TO A PATENT Section 28. Right to a Patent. - The right to a patent belongs to the inventor, his heirs, or assigns. When two (2) or more persons have jointly made an invention, the right to a patent shall belong to them jointly. (Sec. 10, R.A. No. 165a) Section 29. First to File Rule. - If two (2) or more persons have made the invention separately and independently of each other, the right to the patent shall belong to the person who filed an application for such invention, or where two or more applications are filed for the same invention, to the applicant who has the earliest filing date or, the earliest priority date. (3rd sentence, Sec. 10, R.A. No. 165a.) Section 30. Inventions Created Pursuant to a Commission. - 30.1. The person who commissions the work shall own the patent, unless otherwise provided in the contract. 30.2. In case the employee made the invention in the course of his employment contract, the patent shall belong to: (a) The employee, if the inventive activity is not a part of his regular duties even if the employee uses the time, facilities and materials of the employer. (b) The employer, if the invention is the result of the performance of his regularly-assigned duties, unless there is an agreement, express or implied, to the contrary. (n) Section 31. Right of Priority. . - An application for patent filed by any person who has previously applied for the same invention in another country which by treaty, convention, or law affords similar privileges to Filipino citizens, shall be considered as filed as of the date of filing the foreign application: Provided, That: (a) the local application expressly claims priority; (b) it is filed within twelve (12) months from the date the earliest foreign application was filed; and (c) a certified copy of the foreign application together with an English translation is filed within six (6) months from the date of filing in the Philippines. (Sec. 15, R.A. No. 165a) CHAPTER IV PATENT APPLICATION Section 32. The Application. - 32.1. The patent application shall be in Filipino or English and shall contain the following: (a) A request for the grant of a patent; (b) A description of the invention; (c) Drawings necessary for the understanding of the invention; (d) One or more claims; and (e) An abstract. 32.2. No patent may be granted unless the application identifies the inventor. If the applicant is not the inventor, the Office may require him to submit said authority. (Sec. 13, R.A. No. 165a) Section 33. Appointment of Agent or Representative. - An applicant who is not a resident of the Philippines must appoint and maintain a resident agent or representative in the Philippines upon whom notice or process for judicial or administrative procedure relating to the application for patent or the patent may be served. (Sec. 11, R.A. No. 165a) Section 34. The Request. - The request shall contain a petition for the grant of the patent, the name and other data of the applicant, the inventor and the agent and the title of the invention. (n) Section 35. Disclosure and Description of the Invention. - 35.1. Disclosure. - The application shall disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for it to be carried out by a person skilled in the art. Where the application concerns a microbiological process or the product thereof and involves the use of a micro-organism which cannot be sufficiently disclosed in the application in such a way as to enable the invention to be carried out by a person skilled in the art, and such material is not available to the public, the application shall be supplemented by a deposit of such material with an international depository institution. 35.2. Description. - The Regulations shall prescribe the contents of the description and the order of presentation. (Sec. 14, R.A. No. 165a) Section 36. The Claims. - 36.1. The application shall contain one (1) or more claims which shall define the matter for which protection is sought. Each claim shall be clear and concise, and shall be supported by the description. 36.2. The Regulations shall prescribe the manner of the presentation of claims. (n) Section 37. The Abstract. - The abstract shall consist of a concise summary of the disclosure of the invention as contained in the description, claims and drawings in preferably not more than one hundred fifty (150) words. It must be drafted in a way which allows the clear understanding of the technical problem, the gist of the solution of that problem through the invention, and the principal use or uses of the invention. The abstract shall merely serve for technical information. (n) Section 38. Unity of Invention. - 38.1. The application shall relate to one invention only or to a group of inventions forming a single general inventive concept. 38.2. If several independent inventions which do not form a single general inventive concept are claimed in one application, the Director may require that the application be restricted to a single invention. A later application filed for an invention divided out shall be considered as having been filed on the same day as the first application: Provided, That the later application is filed within four (4) months after the requirement to divide becomes final or within such additional time, not exceeding four (4) months, as may be granted: Provided further, That each divisional application shall not go beyond the disclosure in the initial application. 38.3. The fact that a patent has been granted on an application that did not comply with the requirement of unity of invention shall not be a ground to cancel the patent. (Sec. 17, R.A. No. 165a) Section 39. Information Concerning Corresponding Foreign Application for Patents. - The applicant shall, at the request of the Director, furnish him with the date and number of any application for a patent filed by him abroad, hereafter referred to as the "foreign application," relating to the same or essentially the same invention as that claimed in the application filed with the Office and other documents relating to the foreign application. (n) CHAPTER V PROCEDURE FOR GRANT OF PATENT Section 40. Filing Date Requirements. - 40.1. The filing date of a patent application shall be the date of receipt by the Office of at least the following elements: (a) An express or implicit indication that a Philippine patent is sought; (b) Information identifying the applicant; and (c) Description of the invention and one (1) or more claims in Filipino or English. 40.2. If any of these elements is not submitted within the period set by the Regulations, the application shall be considered withdrawn. (n) Section 41. According a Filing Date. - The Office shall examine whether the patent application satisfies the requirements for the grant of date of filing as provided in Section 40 hereof. If the date of filing cannot be accorded, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to correct the deficiencies in accordance with the implementing Regulations. If the application does not contain all the elements indicated in Section 40, the filing date should be that date when all the elements are received. If the deficiencies are not remedied within the prescribed time limit, the application shall be considered withdrawn. (n) Section 42. Formality Examination. - 42.1. After the patent application has been accorded a filing date and the required fees have been paid on time in accordance with the Regulations, the applicant shall comply with the formal requirements specified by Section 32 and the Regulations within the prescribed period, otherwise the application shall be considered withdrawn. 42.2. The Regulations shall determine the procedure for the re-examination and revival of an application as well as the appeal to the Director of Patents from any final action by the examiner. (Sec. 16, R.A. No. 165a) Section 43. Classification and Search. - An application that has complied with the formal requirements shall be classified and a search conducted to determine the prior art. (n) Section 44. Publication of Patent Application. - 44.1. The patent application shall be published in the IPO Gazette together with a search document established by or on behalf of the Office citing any documents that reflect prior art, after the expiration of eighteen ( 18) months from the filing date or priority date. 44.2. After publication of a patent application, any interested party may inspect the application documents filed with the Office. 44.3. The Director General subject to the approval of the Secretary of Trade and Industry, may prohibit or restrict the publication of an application, if in his opinion, to do so would be prejudicial to the national security and interests of the Republic of the Philippines. (n) Section 45. Confidentiality Before Publication. - A patent application, which has not yet been published, and all related documents, shall not be made available for inspection without the consent of the applicant. (n) Section 46. Rights Conferred by a Patent Application After Publication. - The applicant shall have all the rights of a patentee under Section 76 against any person who, without his authorization, exercised any of the rights conferred under Section 71 of this Act in relation to the invention claimed in the published patent application, as if a patent had been granted for that invention: Provided, That the said person had: 46.1. Actual knowledge that the invention that he was using was the subject matter of a published application; or 46.2. Received written notice that the invention that he was using was the subject matter of a published application being identified in the said notice by its serial number: Provided, That the action may not be filed until after the grant of a patent on the published application and within four (4) years from the commission of the acts complained of. (n) Section 47. Observation by Third Parties. - Following the publication of the patent application, any person may present observations in writing concerning the patentability of the invention. Such observations shall be communicated to the applicant who may comment on them. The Office shall acknowledge and put such observations and comment in the file of the application to which it relates. (n) Section 48. Request for Substantive Examination. - 48.1. The application shall be deemed withdrawn unless within six (6) months from the date of publication under Section 41, a written request to determine whether a patent application meets the requirements of Sections 21 to 27 and Sections 32 to 39 and the fees have been paid on time. 48.2. Withdrawal of the request for examination shall be irrevocable and shall not authorize the refund of any fee. (n) Section 49. Amendment of Application. - An applicant may amend the patent application during examination: Provided, That such amendment shall not include new matter outside the scope of the disclosure contained in the application as filed. (n) Section 50. Grant of Patent. - 50.1. If the application meets the requirements of this Act, the Office shall grant the patent: Provided, That all the fees are paid on time. 50.2. If the required fees for grant and printing are not paid in due time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 50.3. A patent shall take effect on the date of the publication of the grant of the patent in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 18, R.A. No. 165a) Section 51. Refusal of the Application. - 51.1. The final order of refusal of the examiner to grant the patent shall be appealable to the Director in accordance with this Act. 51.2. The Regulations shall provide for the procedure by which an appeal from the order of refusal from the Director shall be undertaken. (n) Section 52. Publication Upon Grant of Patent. - 52.1. The grant of the patent together with other related information shall be published in the IPO Gazette within the time prescribed by the Regulations. 52.2. Any interested party may inspect the complete description, claims, and drawings of the patent on file with the Office. (Sec. 18, R.A. No. 165a) Section 53. Contents of Patent. - The patent shall be issued in the name of the Republic of the Philippines under the seal of the Office and shall be signed by the Director, and registered together with the description, claims, and drawings, if any, in books and records of the Office. (Secs. 19 and 20, R.A. No. 165a) Section 54. Term of Patent. - The term of a patent shall be twenty (20) years from the filing date of the application. (Sec. 21, R.A. No. 165a) Section 55. Annual Fees. - 55.1. To maintain the patent application or patent, an annual fee shall be paid upon the expiration of four (4) years from the date the application was published pursuant to Section 44 hereof, and on each subsequent anniversary of such date. Payment may be made within three (3) months before the due date. The obligation to pay the annual fees shall terminate should the application be withdrawn, refused, or cancelled. 55.2. If the annual fee is not paid, the patent application shall be deemed withdrawn or the patent considered as lapsed from the day following the expiration of the period within which the annual fees were due. A notice that the application is deemed withdrawn or the lapse of a patent for non-payment of any annual fee shall be published in the IPO Gazette and the lapse shall be recorded in the Register of the Office. 55.3. A grace period of six (6) months shall be granted for the payment of the annual fee, upon payment of the prescribed surcharge for delayed payment. (Sec. 22, R.A. No. 165a) Section 56. Surrender of Patent. - 56.1. The owner of the patent, with the consent of all persons having grants or licenses or other right, title or interest in and to the patent and the invention covered thereby, which have been recorded in the Office, may surrender his patent or any claim or claims forming part thereof to the Office for cancellation. 56.2. A person may give notice to the Office of his opposition to the surrender of a patent under this section, and if he does so, the Bureau shall notify the proprietor of the patent and determine the question. 56.3. If the Office is satisfied that the patent may properly be surrendered, he may accept the offer and, as from the day when notice of his acceptance is published in the IPO Gazette, the patent shall cease to have effect, but no action for infringement shall lie and no right compensation shall accrue for any use of the patented invention before that day for the services of the government. (Sec. 24, R.A. No. 165a) Section 57. Correction of Mistakes of the Office. - The Director shall have the power to correct, without fee, any mistake in a patent incurred through the fault of the Office when clearly disclosed in the records thereof, to make the patent conform to the records. (Sec. 25, R.A. No. 165) Section 58. Correction of Mistake in the Application. - On request of any interested person and payment of the prescribed fee, the Director is authorized to correct any mistake in a patent of a formal and clerical nature, not incurred through the fault of the Office. (Sec. 26, R.A. No. 165a) Section 59. Changes in Patents. - 59.1. The owner of a patent shall have the right to request the Bureau to make the changes in the patent in order to: (a) Limit the extent of the protection conferred by it; (b) Correct obvious mistakes or to correct clerical errors; and (c) Correct mistakes or errors, other than those referred to in letter (b), made in good faith: Provided, That where the change would result in a broadening of the extent of protection conferred by the patent, no request may be made after the expiration of two (2) years from the grant of a patent and the change shall not affect the rights of any third party which has relied on the patent, as published. 59.2. No change in the patent shall be permitted under this section, where the change would result in the disclosure contained in the patent going beyond the disclosure contained in the application filed. 59.3. If, and to the extent to which the Office changes the patent according to this section, it shall publish the same. (n) Section 60. Form and Publication of Amendment. - An amendment or correction of a patent shall be accomplished by a certificate of such amendment or correction, authenticated by the seal of the Office and signed by the Director, which certificate shall be attached to the patent. Notice of such amendment or correction shall be published in the IPO Gazette and copies of the patent kept or furnished by the Office shall include a copy of the certificate of amendment or correction. (Sec. 27, R.A. No. 165) CHAPTER VI CANCELLATION OF PATENTS AND SUBSTITUTION OF PATENTEE Section 61. Cancellation of Patents. - 61.1. Any interested person may, upon payment of the required fee, petition to cancel the patent or any claim thereof, or parts of the claim, on any of the following grounds: (a) That what is claimed as the invention is not new or Patentable; (b) That the patent does not disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for it to be carried out by any person skilled in the art; or (c) That the patent is contrary to public order or morality. 61.2. Where the grounds for cancellation relate to some of the claims or parts of the claim, cancellation may be effected to such extent only. (Secs. 28 and 29, R.A. No. 165a) Section 62. Requirement of the Petition. - The petition for cancellation shall be in writing, verified by the petitioner or by any person in his behalf who knows the facts, specify the grounds upon which it is based, include a statement of the facts to be relied upon, and filed with the Office. Copies of printed publications or of patents of other countries, and other supporting documents mentioned in the petition shall be attached thereto, together with the translation thereof in English, if not in the English language. (Sec. 30, R.A. No. 165) Section 63. Notice of Hearing. - Upon filing of a petition for cancellation, the Director of Legal Affairs shall forthwith serve notice of the filing thereof upon the patentee and all persons having grants or licenses, or any other right, title or interest in and to the patent and the invention covered thereby, as appears of record in the Office, and of notice of the date of hearing thereon on such persons and the petitioner. Notice of the filing of the petition shall be published in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 31, R.A. No. 165a) Section 64. Committee of Three. - In cases involving highly technical issues, on motion of any party, the Director of Legal Affairs may order that the petition be heard and decided by a committee composed of the Director of Legal Affairs as chairman and two (2) members who have the experience or expertise in the field of technology to which the patent sought to be cancelled relates. The decision of the committee shall be appealable to the Director General. (n) Section 65. Cancellation of the Patent. - 65.1. If the Committee finds that a case for cancellation has been proved, it shall order the patent or any specified claim or claims thereof cancelled. 65.2. If the Committee finds that, taking into consideration the amendment made by the patentee during the cancellation proceedings, the patent and the invention to which it relates meet the requirement of this Act, it may decide to maintain the patent as amended: Provided, That the fee for printing of a new patent is paid within the time limit prescribed in the Regulations. 65.3. If the fee for the printing of a new patent is not paid in due time, the patent should be revoked. 65.4. If the patent is amended under Subsection 65.2 hereof, the Bureau shall, at the same time as it publishes the mention of the cancellation decision, publish the abstract, representative claims and drawings indicating clearly what the amendments consist of. (n) Section 66. Effect of Cancellation of Patent or Claim. - The rights conferred by the patent or any specified claim or claims cancelled shall terminate. Notice of the cancellation shall be published in the IPO Gazette. Unless restrained by the Director General, the decision or order to cancel by Director of Legal Affairs shall be immediately executory even pending appeal. (Sec. 32, R.A. No. 165a) CHAPTER VII REMEDIES OF A PERSON WITH A RIGHT TO A PATENT Section 67. Patent Application by Persons Not Having the Right to a Patent. . - 67.1. If a person referred to in Section 29 other than the applicant, is declared by final court order or decision as having the right to the patent, such person may, within three (3) months after the decision has become final: (a) Prosecute the application as his own application in place of the applicant; (b) File a new patent application in respect of the same invention; (c) Request that the application be refused; or (d) Seek cancellation of the patent, if one has already been issued. 67.2. The provisions of Subsection 38.2 shall apply mutatis mutandis to a new application filed under Subsection 67. 1(b). (n) Section 68. Remedies of the True and Actual Inventor. - If a person, who was deprived of the patent without his consent or through fraud is declared by final court order or decision to be the true and actual inventor, the court shall order for his substitution as patentee, or at the option of the true inventor, cancel the patent, and award actual and other damages in his favor if warranted by the circumstances. (Sec. 33, R.A. No. 165a) Section 69. Publication of the Court Order. - The court shall furnish the Office a copy of the order or decision referred to in Sections 67 and 68, which shall be published in the IPO Gazette within three (3) months from the date such order or decision became final and executory, and shall be recorded in the register of the Office. (n) Section 70. Time to File Action in Court. - The actions indicated in Sections 67 and 68 shall be filed within one (1) year from the date of publication made in accordance with Sections 44 and 51, respectively. (n) CHAPTER VIII RIGHTS OF PATENTEES AND INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS Section 71. Rights Conferred by Patent. - 71.1. A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights: (a) Where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to restrain, prohibit and prevent any unauthorized person or entity from making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing that product; (b) Where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to restrain, prevent or prohibit any unauthorized person or entity from using the process, and from manufacturing, dealing in, using, selling or offering for sale, or importing any product obtained directly or indirectly from such process. 71.2. Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by succession the patent, and to conclude licensing contracts for the same. (Sec. 37, R.A. No. 165a) Section 72. Limitations of Patent Rights. - The owner of a patent has no right to prevent third parties from performing, without his authorization, the acts referred to in Section 71 hereof in the following circumstances: 72.1. Using a patented product which has been put on the market in the Philippines by the owner of the product, or with his express consent, insofar as such use is performed after that product has been so put on the said market; 72.2. Where the act is done privately and on a non-commercial scale or for a non-commercial purpose: Provided, That it does not significantly prejudice the economic interests of the owner of the patent; 72.3. Where the act consists of making or using exclusively for the purpose of experiments that relate to the subject matter of the patented invention; 72.4. Where the act consists of the preparation for individual cases, in a pharmacy or by a medical professional, of a medicine in accordance with a medical prescription or acts concerning the medicine so prepared; 72.5. Where the invention is used in any ship, vessel, aircraft, or land vehicle of any other country entering the territory of the Philippines temporarily or accidentally: Provided, That such invention is used exclusively for the needs of the ship, vessel, aircraft, or land vehicle and not used for the manufacturing of anything to be sold within the Philippines. (Secs. 38 and 39, R.A. No. 165a) Section 73. Prior User. - 73.1. Notwithstanding Section 72 hereof, any prior user, who, in good faith was using the invention or has undertaken serious preparations to use the invention in his enterprise or business, before the filing date or priority date of the application on which a patent is granted, shall have the right to continue the use thereof as envisaged in such preparations within the territory where the patent produces its effect. 73.2. The right of the prior user may only be transferred or assigned together with his enterprise or business, or with that part of his enterprise or business in which the use or preparations for use have been made. (Sec. 40, R.A. No. 165a) Section 74. Use of Invention by Government. - 74.1. A Government agency or third person authorized by the Government may exploit the invention even without agreement of the patent owner where: (a) The public interest, in particular, national security, nutrition, health or the development of other sectors, as determined by the appropriate agency of the government, so requires; or (b) A judicial or administrative body has determined that the manner of exploitation, by the owner of the patent or his licensee is anti-competitive. 74.2. The use by the Government, or third person authorized by the Government shall be subject, mutatis mutandis, to the conditions set forth in Sections 95 to 97 and 100 to 102. (Sec. 41, R.A. No. 165a) Section 75. Extent of Protection and Interpretation of Claims. - 75.1. The extent of protection conferred by the patent shall be determined by the claims, which are to be interpreted in the light of the description and drawings. 75.2. For the purpose of determining the extent of protection conferred by the patent, due account shall be taken of elements which are equivalent to the elements expressed in the claims, so that a claim shall be considered to cover not only all the elements as expressed therein, but also equivalents. (n) Section 76. Civil Action for Infringement. - 76.1. The making, using, offering for sale, selling, or importing a patented product or a product obtained directly or indirectly from a patented process, or the use of a patented process without the authorization of the patentee constitutes patent infringement. 76.2. Any patentee, or anyone possessing any right, title or interest in and to the patented invention, whose rights have been infringed, may bring a civil action before a court of competent jurisdiction, to recover from the infringer such damages sustained thereby, plus attorney's fees and other expenses of litigation, and to secure an injunction for the protection of his rights. 76.3. If the damages are inadequate or cannot be readily ascertained with reasonable certainty, the court may award by way of damages a sum equivalent to reasonable royalty. 76.4. The court may, according to the circumstances of the case, award damages in a sum above the amount found as actual damages sustained: Provided, That the award does not exceed three (3) times the amount of such actual damages. 76.5. The court may, in its discretion, order that the infringing goods, materials and implements predominantly used in the infringement be disposed of outside the channels of commerce or destroyed, without compensation. 76.6. Anyone who actively induces the infringement of a patent or provides the infringer with a component of a patented product or of a product produced because of a patented process knowing it to be especially adopted for infringing the patented invention and not suitable for substantial non-infringing use shall be liable as a contributory infringer and shall be jointly and severally liable with the infringer. (Sec. 42, R.A. No. 165a) Section 77. Infringement Action by a Foreign National. - Any foreign national or juridical entity who meets the requirements of Section 3 and not engaged in business in the Philippines, to which a patent has been granted or assigned under this Act, may bring an action for infringement of patent, whether or not it is licensed to do business in the Philippines under existing law. (Sec. 41-A, R.A. No. 165a) Section 78. Process Patents; Burden of Proof . - If the subject matter of a patent is a process for obtaining a product, any identical product shall be presumed to have been obtained through the use of the patented process if the product is new or there is substantial likelihood that the identical product was made by the process and the owner of the patent has been unable despite reasonable efforts, to determine the process actually used. In ordering the defendant to prove that the process to obtain the identical product is different from the patented process, the court shall adopt measures to protect, as far as practicable, his manufacturing and business secrets. (n) Section 79. Limitation of Action for Damages. - No damages can be recovered for acts of infringement committed more than four (4) years before the institution of the action for infringement. (Sec. 43, R.A. No. 165) Section 80. Damages, Requirement of Notice. - Damages cannot be recovered for acts of infringement committed before the infringer had known, or had reasonable grounds to know of the patent. It is presumed that the infringer had known of the patent if on the patented product, or on the container or package in which the article is supplied to the public, or on the advertising material relating to the patented product or process, are placed the words "Philippine Patent" with the number of the patent. (Sec. 44, R.A. No. 165a) Section 81. Defenses in Action for Infringement. - In an action for infringement, the defendant, in addition to other defenses available to him, may show the invalidity of the patent, or any claim thereof, on any of the grounds on which a petition of cancellation can be brought under Section 61 hereof. (Sec. 45, R.A. No. 165) Section 82. Patent Found Invalid May be Cancelled. - In an action for infringement, if the court shall find the patent or any claim to be invalid, it shall cancel the same, and the Director of Legal Affairs upon receipt of the final judgment of cancellation by the court, shall record that fact in the register of the Office and shall publish a notice to that effect in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 46, R.A. No. 165a) Section 83. Assessor in Infringement Action. - 83.1. Two (2) or more assessors may be appointed by the court. The assessors shall be possessed of the necessary scientific and technical knowledge required by the subject matter in litigation. Either party may challenge the fitness of any assessor proposed for appointment. 83.2. Each assessor shall receive a compensation in an amount to be fixed by the court and advanced by the complaining party, which shall be awarded as part of his costs should he prevail in the action. (Sec. 47, R.A. No. 165a) Section 84. Criminal Action for Repetition of Infringement. - If infringement is repeated by the infringer or by anyone in connivance with him after finality of the judgment of the court against the infringer, the offenders shall, without prejudice to the institution of a civil action for damages, be criminally liable therefor and, upon conviction, shall suffer imprisonment for the period of not less than six (6) months but not more than three (3) years and/or a fine of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000) but not more than Three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000), at the discretion of the court. The criminal action herein provided shall prescribe in three (3) years from date of the commission of the crime. (Sec. 48, R.A. No. 165a) CHAPTER IX VOLUNTARY LICENSING Section 85. Voluntary License Contract. - To encourage the transfer and dissemination of technology, prevent or control practices and conditions that may in particular cases constitute an abuse of intellectual property rights having an adverse effect on competition and trade, all technology transfer arrangements shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter. (n) Section 86. Jurisdiction to Settle Disputes on Royalties. - The Director of the Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau shall exercise quasi-judicial jurisdiction in the settlement of disputes between parties to a technology transfer arrangement arising from technology transfer payments, including the fixing of appropriate amount or rate of royalty. (n) Section 87. Prohibited Clauses. - Except in cases under Section 91, the following provisions shall be deemed prima facie to have an adverse effect on competition and trade: 87.1. Those which impose upon the licensee the obligation to acquire from a specific source capital goods, intermediate products, raw materials, and other technologies, or of permanently employing personnel indicated by the licensor; 87.2. Those pursuant to which the licensor reserves the right to fix the sale or resale prices of the products manufactured on the basis of the license; 87.3. Those that contain restrictions regarding the volume and structure of production; 87.4. Those that prohibit the use of competitive technologies in a non-exclusive technology transfer agreement; 87.5. Those that establish a full or partial purchase option in favor of the licensor; 87.6. Those that obligate the licensee to transfer for free to the licensor the inventions or improvements that may be obtained through the use of the licensed technology; 87.7. Those that require payment of royalties to the owners of patents for patents which are not used; 87.8. Those that prohibit the licensee to export the licensed product unless justified for the protection of the legitimate interest of the licensor such as exports to countries where exclusive licenses to manufacture and/or distribute the licensed product(s) have already been granted; 87.9. Those which restrict the use of the technology supplied after the expiration of the technology transfer arrangement, except in cases of early termination of the technology transfer arrangement due to reason(s) attributable to the licensee; 87.10. Those which require payments for patents and other industrial property rights after their expiration, termination arrangement; 87.11. Those which require that the technology recipient shall not contest the validity of any of the patents of the technology supplier; 87.12. Those which restrict the research and development activities of the licensee designed to absorb and adapt the transferred technology to local conditions or to initiate research and development programs in connection with new products, processes or equipment; 87.13. Those which prevent the licensee from adapting the imported technology to local conditions, or introducing innovation to it, as long as it does not impair the quality standards prescribed by the licensor; 87.14. Those which exempt the licensor for liability for non-fulfilment of his responsibilities under the technology transfer arrangement and/or liability arising from third party suits brought about by the use of the licensed product or the licensed technology; and 87.15. Other clauses with equivalent effects. (Sec. 33-C (2), R.A 165a) Section 88. Mandatory Provisions. - The following provisions shall be included in voluntary license contracts: 88.1. That the laws of the Philippines shall govern the interpretation of the same and in the event of litigation, the venue shall be the proper court in the place where the licensee has its principal office; 88.2. Continued access to improvements in techniques and processes related to the technology shall be made available during the period of the technology transfer arrangement; 88.3. In the event the technology transfer arrangement shall provide for arbitration, the Procedure of Arbitration of the Arbitration Law of the Philippines or the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) or the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) shall apply and the venue of arbitration shall be the Philippines or any neutral country; and 88.4. The Philippine taxes on all payments relating to the technology transfer arrangement shall be borne by the licensor. (n) Section 89. Rights of Licensor. - In the absence of any provision to the contrary in the technology transfer arrangement, the grant of a license shall not prevent the licensor from granting further licenses to third person nor from exploiting the subject matter of the technology transfer arrangement himself. (Sec. 33-B, R.A. 165a) Section 90. Rights of Licensee. - The licensee shall be entitled to exploit the subject matter of the technology transfer arrangement during the whole term of the technology transfer arrangement. (Sec. 33-C (1), R.A. 165a) Section 91. Exceptional Cases. - In exceptional or meritorious cases where substantial benefits will accrue to the economy, such as high technology content, increase in foreign exchange earnings, employment generation, regional dispersal of industries and/or substitution with or use of local raw materials, or in the case of Board of Investments, registered companies with pioneer status, exemption from any of the above requirements may be allowed by the Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau after evaluation thereof on a case by case basis. (n) Section 92. Non-Registration with the Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau. - Technology transfer arrangements that conform with the provisions of Sections 86 and 87 need not be registered with the Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau. Non-conformance with any of the provisions of Sections 87 and 88, however, shall automatically render the technology transfer arrangement unenforceable, unless said technology transfer arrangement is approved and registered with the Documentation, Information and Technology Transfer Bureau under the provisions of Section 91 on exceptional cases. (n) CHAPTER X COMPULSORY LICENSING Section 93. Grounds for Compulsory Licensing. - The Director of Legal Affairs may grant a license to exploit a patented invention, even without the agreement of the patent owner, in favor of any person who has shown his capability to exploit the invention, under any of the following circumstances: 93.1. National emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency; 93.2. Where the public interest, in particular, national security, nutrition, health or the development of other vital sectors of the national economy as determined by the appropriate agency of the Government, so requires; or 93.3. Where a judicial or administrative body has determined that the manner of exploitation by the owner of the patent or his licensee is anti-competitive; or 93.4. In case of public non-commercial use of the patent by the patentee, without satisfactory reason; 93.5. If the patented invention is not being worked in the Philippines on a commercial scale, although capable of being worked, without satisfactory reason: Provided, That the importation of the patented article shall constitute working or using the patent. (Secs. 34, 34-A, 34-B, R.A. No. 165a) Section 94. Period for Filing a Petition for a Compulsory License. - 94.1. A compulsory license may not be applied for on the ground stated in Subsection 93.5 before the expiration of a period of four (4) years from the date of filing of the application or three (3) years from the date of the patent whichever period expires last. 94.2. A compulsory license which is applied for on any of the grounds stated in Subsections 93.2, 93.3, and 93.4 and Section 97 may be applied for at any time after the grant of the patent. (Sec. 34(1), R.A. No. 165) Section 95. Requirement to Obtain a License on Reasonable Commercial Terms. - 95.1. The license will only be granted after the petitioner has made efforts to obtain authorization from the patent owner on reasonable commercial terms and conditions but such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable period of time. 95.2. The requirement under Subsection 95.1 shall not apply in the following cases: (a) Where the petition for compulsory license seeks to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anti-competitive; (b) In situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency; (c) In cases of public non-commercial use. 95.3. In situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, the right holder shall be notified as soon as reasonably practicable. 95.4. In the case of public non-commercial use, where the government or contractor, without making a patent search, knows or has demonstrable grounds to know that a valid patent is or will be used by or for the government, the right holder shall be informed promptly. (n) Section 96. Compulsory Licensing of Patents Involving Semi-Conductor Technology. - In the case of compulsory licensing of patents involving semi-conductor technology, the license may only be granted in case of public non-commercial use or to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anti-competitive. (n) Section 97. Compulsory License Based on Interdependence of Patents. - If the invention protected by a patent, hereafter referred to as the "second patent," within the country cannot be worked without infringing another patent, hereafter referred to as the "first patent," granted on a prior application or benefiting from an earlier priority, a compulsory license may be granted to the owner of the second patent to the extent necessary for the working of his invention, subject to the following conditions: 97.1. The invention claimed in the second patent involves an important technical advance of considerable economic significance in relation to the first patent; 97.2. The owner of the first patent shall be entitled to a cross-license on reasonable terms to use the invention claimed in the second patent; 97.3. The use authorized in respect of the first patent shall be non-assignable except with the assignment of the second patent; and 97.4. The terms and conditions of Sections 95, 96 and 98 to 100 of this Act. (Sec. 34-C, R.A. No. 165a) Section 98. Form and Contents of Petition. - The petition for compulsory licensing must be in writing, verified by the petitioner and accompanied by payment of the required filing fee. It shall contain the name and address of the petitioner as well as those of the respondents, the number and date of issue of the patent in connection with which compulsory license is sought, the name of the patentee, the title of the invention, the statutory grounds upon which compulsory license is sought, the ultimate facts constituting the petitioner's cause of action, and the relief prayed for. (Sec. 34-D, R.A. No. 165) Section 99. Notice of Hearing. - 99.1. Upon filing of a petition, the Director of Legal Affairs shall forthwith serve notice of the filing thereof upon the patent owner and all persons having grants or licenses, or any other right, title or interest in and to the patent and invention covered thereby as appears of record in the Office, and of notice of the date of hearing thereon, on such persons and petitioner. The resident agent or representative appointed in accordance with Section 33 hereof, shall be bound to accept service of notice of the filing of the petition within the meaning of this Section. 99.2. In every case, the notice shall be published by the said Office in a newspaper of general circulation, once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks and once in the IPO Gazette at applicant's expense. (Sec. 34-E, R.A. No. 165) Section 100. Terms and Conditions of Compulsory License. - The basic terms and conditions including the rate of royalties of a compulsory license shall be fixed by the Director of Legal Affairs subject to the following conditions: 100.1. The scope and duration of such license shall be limited to the purpose for which it was authorized; 100.2. The license shall be non-exclusive; 100.3. The license shall be non-assignable, except with that part of the enterprise or business with which the invention is being exploited; 100.4. Use of the subject matter of the license shall be devoted predominantly for the supply of the Philippine market: Provided, That this limitation shall not apply where the grant of the license is based on the ground that the patentee's manner of exploiting the patent is determined by judicial or administrative process, to be anti-competitive. 100.5. The license may be terminated upon proper showing that circumstances which led to its grant have ceased to exist and are unlikely to recur: Provided, That adequate protection shall be afforded to the legitimate interest of the licensee; and 100.6. The patentee shall be paid adequate remuneration taking into account the economic value of the grant or authorization, except that in cases where the license was granted to remedy a practice which was determined after judicial or administrative process, to be anti-competitive, the need to correct the anti-competitive practice may be taken into account in fixing the amount of remuneration. (Sec. 35-B, R.A. No. 165a) Section 101. Amendment, Cancellation, Surrender of Compulsory License. - 101.1. Upon the request of the patentee or the licensee, the Director of Legal Affairs may amend the decision granting the compulsory license, upon proper showing of new facts or circumstances justifying such amendment. 101.2. Upon the request of the patentee, the said Director may cancel the compulsory license: (a) If the ground for the grant of the compulsory license no longer exists and is unlikely to recur; (b) If the licensee has neither begun to supply the domestic market nor made serious preparation therefor; (c) If the licensee has not complied with the prescribed terms of the license; 101.3. The licensee may surrender the license by a written declaration submitted to the Office. 101.4. The said Director shall cause the amendment, surrender, or cancellation in the Register, notify the patentee, and/or the licensee, and cause notice thereof to be published in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 35-D, R.A. No. 165a) Section 102. Licensee's Exemption from Liability. - Any person who works a patented product, substance and/or process under a license granted under this Chapter, shall be free from any liability for infringement: Provided however, That in the case of voluntary licensing, no collusion with the licensor is proven. This is without prejudice to the right of the rightful owner of the patent to recover from the licensor whatever he may have received as royalties under the license. (Sec. 35-E, R.A. No. 165a) CHAPTER XI ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION OF RIGHTS Section 103. Transmission of Rights. - 103.1. Patents or applications for patents and invention to which they relate, shall be protected in the same way as the rights of other property under the Civil Code. 103.2. Inventions and any right, title or interest in and to patents and inventions covered thereby, may be assigned or transmitted by inheritance or bequest or may be the subject of a license contract. (Sec. 50, R.A. No. 165a) Section 104. Assignment of Inventions. - An assignment may be of the entire right, title or interest in and to the patent and the invention covered thereby, or of an undivided share of the entire patent and invention, in which event the parties become joint owners thereof. An assignment may be limited to a specified territory. (Sec. 51, R.A. No. 165) Section 105. Form of Assignment. - The assignment must be in writing, acknowledged before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oath or perform notarial acts, and certified under the hand and official seal of the notary or such other officer. (Sec. 52, R.A. No. 165) Section 106. Recording. - 106.1. The Office shall record assignments, licenses and other instruments relating to the transmission of any right, title or interest in and to inventions, and patents or application for patents or inventions to which they relate, which are presented in due form to the Office for registration, in books and records kept for the purpose. The original documents together with a signed duplicate thereof shall be filed, and the contents thereof should be kept confidential. If the original is not available, an authenticated copy thereof in duplicate may be filed. Upon recording, the Office shall retain the duplicate, return the original or the authenticated copy to the party who filed the same and notice of the recording shall be published in the IPO Gazette. 106.2. Such instruments shall be void as against any subsequent purchaser or mortgagee for valuable consideration and without notice, unless, it is so recorded in the Office, within three (3) months from the date of said instrument, or prior to the subsequent purchase or mortgage. (Sec. 53, R.A. No. 165a) Section 107. Rights of Joint Owners. - If two (2) or more persons jointly own a patent and the invention covered thereby, either by the issuance of the patent in their joint favor or by reason of the assignment of an undivided share in the patent and invention or by reason of the succession in title to such share, each of the joint owners shall be entitled to personally make, use, sell, or import the invention for his own profit: Provided, however, That neither of the joint owners shall be entitled to grant licenses or to assign his right, title or interest or part thereof without the consent of the other owner or owners, or without proportionally dividing the proceeds with such other owner or owners. (Sec. 54, R.A. No. 165) CHAPTER XII REGISTRATION OF UTILITY MODELS Section 108. Applicability of Provisions Relating to Patents. - 108.1. Subject to Section 109, the provisions governing patents shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the registration of utility models. 108.2. Where the right to a patent conflicts with the right to a utility model registration in the case referred to in Section 29, the said provision shall apply as if the word "patent" were replaced by the words "patent or utility model registration". (Sec. 55, R.A. No. 165a) Section 109. Special Provisions Relating to Utility Models. - 109.1. (a) An invention qualifies for registration as a utility model if it is new and industrially applicable. (b) Section 21, "Patentable Inventions", shall apply except the reference to inventive step as a condition of protection. 109.2. Sections 43 to 49 shall not apply in the case of applications for registration of a utility model. 109.3. A utility model registration shall expire, without any possibility of renewal, at the end of the seventh year after the date of the filing of the application. 109.4. In proceedings under Sections 61 to 64, the utility model registration shall be canceled on the following grounds: (a) That the claimed invention does not qualify for registration as a utility model and does not meet the requirements of registrability, in particular having regard to Subsection 109.1 and Sections 22, 23, 24 and 27; (b) That the description and the claims do not comply with the prescribed requirements; (c) That any drawing which is necessary for the understanding of the invention has not been furnished; (d) That the owner of the utility model registration is not the inventor or his successor in title. (Secs. 55, 56, and 57, R.A. No. 165a) Section 110. Conversion of Patent Applications or Applications for Utility Model Registration. - 110.1. At any time before the grant or refusal of a patent, an applicant for a patent may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, convert his application into an application for registration of a utility model, which shall be accorded the filing date of the initial application. An application may be converted only once. 110.2. At any time before the grant or refusal of a utility model registration, an applicant for a utility model registration may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, convert his application into a patent application, which shall be accorded the filing date of the initial application. (Sec. 58, R.A. No. 165a) Section 111. Prohibition against Filing of Parallel Applications. - An applicant may not file two (2) applications for the same subject, one for utility model registration and the other for the grant of a patent whether simultaneously or consecutively. (Sec. 59, R.A. No. 165a) CHAPTER XIII INDUSTRIAL DESIGN Section 112. Definition of Industrial Design. - An industrial design is any composition of lines or colors or any three-dimensional form, whether or not associated-with lines or colors: Provided, That such composition or form gives a special appearance to and can serve as pattern for an industrial product or handicraft. (Sec. 55, R.A. No. 165a) Section 113. Substantive Conditions for Protection. - 113.1. Only industrial designs that are new or original shall benefit from protection under this Act. 113.2. Industrial designs dictated essentially by technical or functional considerations to obtain a technical result or those that are contrary to public order, health or morals shall not be protected. (n) Section 114. Contents of the Application. - 114.1. Every application for registration of an industrial design shall contain: (a) A request for registration of the industrial design; (b) Information identifying the applicant; (c) An indication of the kind of article of manufacture or handicraft to which the design shall be applied; (d) A representation of the article of manufacture or handicraft by way of drawings, photographs or other adequate graphic representation of the design as applied to the article of manufacture or handicraft which clearly and fully discloses those features for which design protection is claimed; and (e) The name and address of the creator, or where the applicant is not the creator, a statement indicating the origin of the right to the industrial design registration. 114.2. The application may be accompanied by a specimen of the article embodying the industrial design and shall be subject to the payment of the prescribed fee.(n) Section 115. Several Industrial Designs in One Application. - Two (2) or more industrial designs may be the subject of the same application: Provided, That they relate to the same sub-class of the International Classification or to the same set or composition of articles. (n) Section 116. Examination. - 116.1. The Office shall accord as the filing date the date of receipt of the application containing indications allowing the identity of the applicant to be established and a representation of the article embodying the industrial design or a pictorial representation thereof. 116.2. If the application does not meet these requirements the filing date should be that date when all the elements specified in Section 105 are filed or the mistakes corrected. Otherwise if the requirements are not complied within the prescribed period, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 116.3. After the application has been accorded a filing date and the required fees paid on time, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of Section 114 within the prescribed period, otherwise the application shall be considered withdrawn. 116.4. The Office shall examine whether the industrial design complies with requirements of Section 112 and Subsections 113.2 and 113.3. (n) Section 117. Registration. - 117.1. Where the Office finds that the conditions referred to in Section 113 are fulfilled, it shall order that registration be effected in the industrial design register and cause the issuance of an industrial design certificate of registration, otherwise, it shall refuse the application. 117.2. The form and contents of an industrial design certificate shall be established by the Regulations: Provided, That the name and address of the creator shall be mentioned in every case. 117.3. Registration shall be published in the form and within the period fixed by the Regulations. 117.4. The Office shall record in the register any change in the identity of the proprietor of the industrial design or his representative, if proof thereof is furnished to it. A fee shall be paid, with the request to record the change in the identity of the proprietor. If the fee is not paid, the request shall be deemed not to have been filed. In such case, the former proprietor and the former representative shall remain subject to the rights and obligations as provided in this Act. 117.5. Anyone may inspect the Register and the files of registered industrial designs including the files of cancellation proceedings. (n) Section 118. The Term of Industrial Design Registration. - 118.1 The registration of an industrial design shall be for a period of five (5) years from the filing date of the application. 118.2. The registration of an industrial design may be renewed for not more than two (2) consecutive periods of five (5) years each, by paying the renewal fee. 118.3. The renewal fee shall be paid within twelve (12) months preceding the expiration of the period of registration. However, a grace period of six (6) months shall be granted for payment of the fees after such expiration, upon payment of a surcharge 118.4. The Regulations shall fix the amount of renewal fee, the surcharge and other requirements regarding the recording of renewals of registration. Section 119. Application of Other Sections and Chapters. - 119.1. The following provisions relating to patents shall apply mutatis mutandis to an industrial design registration: Section 21 - Novelty: Section 24 - Prior art: Provided, That the disclosure is contained in printed documents or in any tangible form; Section 25 - Non-prejudicial Disclosure; Section 27 - Inventions Created Pursuant to a Commission; Section 28 - Right to a Patent; Section 29 - First to File Rule; Section 31 - Right of Priority: Provided, That the application for industrial design shall be filed within six (6) months from the earliest filing date of the corresponding foreign application; Section 33 - Appointment of Agent or Representative; Section 51 - Refusal of the Application; Sections 56 to 60 - Surrender, Correction of and Changes in Patent; CHAPTER VII - Remedies of a Person with a Right to Patent; CHAPTER VIII - Rights of Patentees and Infringement of Patents; and CHAPTER XI - Assignment and Transmission of Rights. 119.2. If the essential elements of an industrial design which is the subject of an application have been obtained from the creation of another person without his consent, protection under this Chapter cannot be invoked against the injured party. (n) Section 120. Cancellation of Design Registration. - 120.1. At any time during the term of the industrial design registration, any person upon payment of the required fee, may petition the Director of Legal Affairs to cancel the industrial design on any of the following grounds: (a) If the subject matter of the industrial design is not registrable within the terms of Sections 112 and 113; (b) If the subject matter is not new; or (c) If the subject matter of the industrial design extends beyond the content of the application as originally filed. 120.2. Where the grounds for cancellation relate to a part of the industrial design, cancellation may be effected to such extent only. The restriction may be effected in the form of an alteration of the effected features of the design. (n) PART III THE LAW ON TRADEMARKS, SERVICE MARKS AND TRADE NAMES Section 121. Definitions. - As used in Part III, the following terms have the following meanings: 121.1. "Mark" means any visible sign capable of distinguishing the goods (trademark) or services (service mark) of an enterprise and shall include a stamped or marked container of goods; (Sec. 38, R.A. No. 166a) 121.2. "Collective mark" means any visible sign designated as such in the application for registration and capable of distinguishing the origin or any other common characteristic, including the quality of goods or services of different enterprises which use the sign under the control of the registered owner of the collective mark; (Sec. 40, R.A. No. 166a) 121.3. "Trade name" means the name or designation identifying or distinguishing an enterprise; (Sec. 38, R.A. No. 166a) 121.4. "Bureau" means the Bureau of Trademarks; 121.5. "Director" means the Director of Trademarks; 121.6. "Regulations" means the Rules of Practice in Trademarks and Service Marks formulated by the Director of Trademarks and approved by the Director General; and 121.7. "Examiner" means the trademark examiner. (Sec. 38, R.A. No. 166a) Section 122. How Marks are Acquired. - The rights in a mark shall be acquired through registration made validly in accordance with the provisions of this law. (Sec. 2-A, R A. No. 166a) Section 123. Registrability. - 123.1. A mark cannot be registered if it: (a) Consists of immoral, deceptive or scandalous matter, or matter which may disparage or falsely suggest a connection with persons, living or dead, institutions, beliefs, or national symbols, or bring them into contempt or disrepute; (b) Consists of the flag or coat of arms or other insignia of the Philippines or any of its political subdivisions, or of any foreign nation, or any simulation thereof; (c) Consists of a name, portrait or signature identifying a particular living individual except by his written consent, or the name, signature, or portrait of a deceased President of the Philippines, during the life of his widow, if any, except by written consent of the widow; (d) Is identical with a registered mark belonging to a different proprietor or a mark with an earlier filing or priority date, in respect of: (i) The same goods or services, or (ii) Closely related goods or services, or (iii) If it nearly resembles such a mark as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion; (e) Is identical with, or confusingly similar to, or constitutes a translation of a mark which is considered by the competent authority of the Philippines to be well-known internationally and in the Philippines, whether or not it is registered here, as being already the mark of a person other than the applicant for registration, and used for identical or similar goods or services: Provided, That in determining whether a mark is well-known, account shall be taken of the knowledge of the relevant sector of the public, rather than of the public at large, including knowledge in the Philippines which has been obtained as a result of the promotion of the mark; (f) Is identical with, or confusingly similar to, or constitutes a translation of a mark considered well-known in accordance with the preceding paragraph, which is registered in the Philippines with respect to goods or services which are not similar to those with respect to which registration is applied for: Provided, That use of the mark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection between those goods or services, and the owner of the registered mark: Provided further, That the interests of the owner of the registered mark are likely to be damaged by such use; (g) Is likely to mislead the public, particularly as to the nature, quality, characteristics or geographical origin of the goods or services; (h) Consists exclusively of signs that are generic for the goods or services that they seek to identify; (i) Consists exclusively of signs or of indications that have become customary or usual to designate the goods or services in everyday language or in bona fide and established trade practice; (j) Consists exclusively of signs or of indications that may serve in trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin, time or production of the goods or rendering of the services, or other characteristics of the goods or services; (k) Consists of shapes that may be necessitated by technical factors or by the nature of the goods themselves or factors that affect their intrinsic value; (l) Consists of color alone, unless defined by a given form; or (m) Is contrary to public order or morality. 123.2. As regards signs or devices mentioned in paragraphs (j), (k), and (l), nothing shall prevent the registration of any such sign or device which has become distinctive in relation to the goods for which registration is requested as a result of the use that have been made of it in commerce in the Philippines. The Office may accept as prima facie evidence that the mark has become distinctive, as used in connection with the applicant's goods or services in commerce, proof of substantially exclusive and continuous use thereof by the applicant in commerce in the Philippines for five (5) years before the date on which the claim of distinctiveness is made. 123.3. The nature of the goods to which the mark is applied will not constitute an obstacle to registration. (Sec. 4, R.A. No. 166a) Section 124. Requirements of Application. - 124.1. The application for the registration of the mark shall be in Filipino or in English and shall contain the following: (a) A request for registration; (b) The name and address of the applicant; (c) The name of a State of which the applicant is a national or where he has domicile; and the name of a State in which the applicant has a real and effective industrial or commercial establishment, if any; (d) Where the applicant is a juridical entity, the law under which it is organized and existing; (e) The appointment of an agent or representative, if the applicant is not domiciled in the Philippines; (f) Where the applicant claims the priority of an earlier application, an indication of: i) The name of the State with whose national office the earlier application was filed or if filed with an office other than a national office, the name of that office, ii) The date on which the earlier application was filed, and iii) Where available, the application number of the earlier application; (g) Where the applicant claims color as a distinctive feature of the mark, a statement to that effect as well as the name or names of the color or colors claimed and an indication, in respect of each color, of the principal parts of the mark which are in that color; (h) Where the mark is a three-dimensional mark, a statement to that effect; (i) One or more reproductions of the mark, as prescribed in the Regulations; (j) A transliteration or translation of the mark or of some parts of the mark, as prescribed in the Regulations; (k) The names of the goods or services for which the registration is sought, grouped according to the classes of the Nice Classification, together with the number of the class of the said Classification to which each group of goods or services belongs; and (l) A signature by, or other self-identification of, the applicant or his representative. 124.2. The applicant or the registrant shall file a declaration of actual use of the mark with evidence to that effect, as prescribed by the Regulations within three (3) years from the filing date of the application. Otherwise, the application shall be refused or the mark shall be removed from the Register by the Director. 124.3. One (1) application may relate to several goods and/or services, whether they belong to one (1) class or to several classes of the Nice Classification. 124.4. If during the examination of the application, the Office finds factual basis to reasonably doubt the veracity of any indication or element in the application, it may require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence to remove the doubt. (Sec. 5, R.A. No. 166a) Section 125. Representation; Address for Service. - If the applicant is not domiciled or has no real and effective commercial establishment in the Philippines, he shall designate by a written document filed in the Office, the name and address of a Philippine resident who may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the mark. Such notices or services may be served upon the person so designated by leaving a copy thereof at the address specified in the last designation filed. If the person so designated cannot be found at the address given in the last designation, such notice or process may be served upon the Director. (Sec. 3, R.A. No. 166a) Section 126. Disclaimers. - The Office may allow or require the applicant to disclaim an unregistrable component of an otherwise registrable mark but such disclaimer shall not prejudice or affect the applicant's or owner's rights then existing or thereafter arising in the disclaimed matter, nor such shall disclaimer prejudice or affect the applicant's or owner's right on another application of later date if the disclaimed matter became distinctive of the applicant's or owner's goods, business or services. (Sec. 13, R.A. No. 166a) Section 127. Filing Date. - 127.1. Requirements. - The filing date of an application shall be the date on which the Office received the following indications and elements in English or Filipino: (a) An express or implicit indication that the registration of a mark is sought; (b) The identity of the applicant; (c) Indications sufficient to contact the applicant or his representative, if any; (d) A reproduction of the mark whose registration is sought; and (e) The list of the goods or services for which the registration is sought. 127.2. No filing date shall be accorded until the required fee is paid. (n) Section 128. Single Registration for Goods and/or Services. - Where goods and/or services belonging to several classes of the Nice Classification have been included in one (1) application, such an application shall result in one registration. (n) Section 129. Division of Application. - Any application referring to several goods or services, hereafter referred to as the "initial application," may be divided by the applicant into two (2) or more applications, hereafter referred to as the "divisional applications," by distributing among the latter the goods or services referred to in the initial application. The divisional applications shall preserve the filing date of the initial application or the benefit of the right of priority. (n) Section 130. Signature and Other Means of Self-Identification. - 130.1. Where a signature is required, the Office shall accept: (a) A hand-written signature; or (b) The use of other forms of signature, such as a printed or stamped signature, or the use of a seal instead of a hand-written signature: Provided, That where a seal is used, it should be accompanied by an indication in letters of the name of the signatory. 130.2. The Office shall accept communications to it by telecopier, or by electronic means subject to the conditions or requirements that will be prescribed by the Regulations. When communications are made by telefacsimile, the reproduction of the signature, or the reproduction of the seal together with, where required, the indication in letters of the name of the natural person whose seal is used, appears. The original communications must be received by the Office within thirty (30) days from date of receipt of the telefacsimile. 130.3. No attestation, notarization, authentication, legalization or other certification of any signature or other means of self-identification referred to in the preceding paragraphs, will be required, except, where the signature concerns the surrender of a registration. (n) Section 131. Priority Right. - 131.1. An application for registration of a mark filed in the Philippines by a person referred to in Section 3, and who previously duly filed an application for registration of the same mark in one of those countries, shall be considered as filed as of the day the application was first filed in the foreign country. 131.2. No registration of a mark in the Philippines by a person described in this section shall be granted until such mark has been registered in the country of origin of the applicant. 131.3. Nothing in this section shall entitle the owner of a registration granted under this section to sue for acts committed prior to the date on which his mark was registered in this country: Provided, That, notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a well-known mark as defined in Section 123.1(e) of this Act, that is not registered in the Philippines, may, against an identical or confusingly similar mark, oppose its registration, or petition the cancellation of its registration or sue for unfair competition, without prejudice to availing himself of other remedies provided for under the law. 131.4. In like manner and subject to the same conditions and requirements, the right provided in this section may be based upon a subsequent regularly filed application in the same foreign country: Provided, That any foreign application filed prior to such subsequent application has been withdrawn, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of, without having been laid open to public inspection and without leaving any rights outstanding, and has not served, nor thereafter shall serve, as a basis for claiming a right of priority. (Sec. 37, R.A. No. 166a) Section 132. Application Number and Filing Date. - 132.1. The Office shall examine whether the application satisfies the requirements for the grant of a filing date as provided in Section 127 and Regulations relating thereto. If the application does not satisfy the filing requirements, the Office shall notify the applicant who shall within a period fixed by the Regulations complete or correct the application as required, otherwise, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 132.2 Once an application meets the filing requirements of Section 127, it shall be numbered in the sequential order, and the applicant shall be informed of the application number and the filing date of the application will be deemed to have been abandoned. (n) Section 133. Examination and Publication. - 133.1. Once the application meets the filing requirements of Section 127, the Office shall examine whether the application meets the requirements of Section 124 and the mark as defined in Section 121 is registrable under Section 123. 133.2. Where the Office finds that the conditions referred to in Subsection 133.1 are fulfilled, it shall upon payment of the prescribed fee, forthwith cause the application, as filed, to be published in the prescribed manner. 133.3. If after the examination, the applicant is not entitled to registration for any reason, the Office shall advise the applicant thereof and the reasons therefor. The applicant shall have a period of four (4) months in which to reply or amend his application, which shall then be re-examined. The Regulations shall determine the procedure for the re-examination or revival of an application as well as the appeal to the Director of Trademarks from any final action by the Examiner. 133.4. An abandoned application may be revived as a pending application within three (3) months from the date of abandonment, upon good cause shown and the payment of the required fee. 133.5. The final decision of refusal of the Director of Trademarks shall be appealable to the Director General in accordance with the procedure fixed by the Regulations. (Sec. 7, R.A. No. 166a) Section 134. Opposition. - Any person who believes that he would be damaged by the registration of a mark may, upon payment of the required fee and within thirty (30) days after the publication referred to in Subsection 133.2, file with the Office an opposition to the application. Such opposition shall be in writing and verified by the oppositor or by any person on his behalf who knows the facts, and shall specify the grounds on which it is based and include a statement of the facts relied upon. Copies of certificates of registration of marks registered in other countries or other supporting documents mentioned in the opposition shall be filed therewith, together with the translation in English, if not in the English language. For good cause shown and upon payment of the required surcharge, the time for filing an opposition may be extended by the Director of Legal Affairs, who shall notify the applicant of such extension. The Regulations shall fix the maximum period of time within which to file the opposition. (Sec. 8, R.A. No. 165a) Section 135. Notice and Hearing. - Upon the filing of an opposition, the Office shall serve notice of the filing on the applicant, and of the date of the hearing thereof upon the applicant and the oppositor and all other persons having any right, title or interest in the mark covered by the application, as appear of record in the Office. (Sec. 9, R.A. No. 165) Section 136. Issuance and Publication of Certificate. - When the period for filing the opposition has expired, or when the Director of Legal Affairs shall have denied the opposition, the Office upon payment of the required fee, shall issue the certificate of registration. Upon issuance of a certificate of registration, notice thereof making reference to the publication of the application shall be published in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 10, R.A. No. 165) Section 137. Registration of Mark and Issuance of a Certificate to the Owner or his Assignee. - 137.1. The Office shall maintain a Register in which shall be registered marks, numbered in the order of their registration, and all transactions in respect of each mark, required to be recorded by virtue of this law. 137.2. The registration of a mark shall include a reproduction of the mark and shall mention: its number; the name and address of the registered owner and, if the registered owner's address is outside the country, his address for service within the country; the dates of application and registration; if priority is claimed, an indication of this fact, and the number, date and country of the application, basis of the priority claims; the list of goods or services in respect of which registration has been granted, with the indication of the corresponding class or classes; and such other data as the Regulations may prescribe from time to time. 137.3. A certificate of registration of a mark may be issued to the assignee of the applicant: Provided, That the assignment is recorded in the Office. In case of a change of ownership, the Office shall at the written request signed by the owner, or his representative, or by the new owner, or his representative and upon a proper showing and the payment of the prescribed fee, issue to such assignee a new certificate of registration of the said mark in the name of such assignee, and for the unexpired part of the original period. 137.4. The Office shall record any change of address, or address for service, which shall be notified to it by the registered owner. 137.5. In the absence of any provision to the contrary in this Act, communications to be made to the registered owner by virtue of this Act shall be sent to him at his last recorded address and, at the same, at his last recorded address for service. (Sec. 19, R.A. No. 166a) Section 138. Certificates of Registration. - A certificate of registration of a mark shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of the registration, the registrant's ownership of the mark, and of the registrant's exclusive right to use the same in connection with the goods or services and those that are related thereto specified in the certificate. (Sec. 20, R.A. No. 165) Section 139. Publication of Registered Marks; Inspection of Register. - 139.1. The Office shall publish, in the form and within the period fixed by the Regulations, the marks registered, in the order of their registration, reproducing all the particulars referred to in Subsection 137.2. 139.2. Marks registered at the Office may be inspected free of charge and any person may obtain copies thereof at his own expense. This provision shall also be applicable to transactions recorded in respect of any registered mark. (n) Section 140. Cancellation upon Application by Registrant; Amendment or Disclaimer of Registration. - Upon application of the registrant, the Office may permit any registration to be surrendered for cancellation, and upon cancellation the appropriate entry shall be made in the records of the Office. Upon application of the registrant and payment of the prescribed fee, the Office for good cause may permit any registration to be amended or to be disclaimed in part: Provided, That the amendment or disclaimer does not alter materially the character of the mark. Appropriate entry shall be made in the records of the Office upon the certificate of registration or, if said certificate is lost or destroyed, upon a certified copy thereof (Sec. 14, R.A. No. 166) Section 141. Sealed and Certified Copies as Evidence. - Copies of any records, books, papers, or drawings belonging to the Office relating to marks, and copies of registrations, when authenticated by the seal of the Office and certified by the Director of the Administrative, Financial and Human Resource Development Service Bureau or in his name by an employee of the Office duly authorized by said Director, shall be evidence in all cases wherein the originals would be evidence; and any person who applies and pays the prescribed fee shall secure such copies. (n) Section 142. Correction of Mistakes Made by the Office. - Whenever a material mistake in a registration incurred through the fault of the Office is clearly disclosed by the records of the Office, a certificate stating the fact and nature of such mistake shall be issued without charge, recorded and a printed copy thereof shall be attached to each printed copy of the registration. Such corrected registration shall thereafter have the same effect as the original certificate; or in the discretion of the Director of the Administrative, Financial and Human Resource Development Service Bureau a new certificate of registration may be issued without charge. All certificates of correction heretofore issued in accordance with the Regulations and the registration to which they are attached shall have the same force and effect as if such certificates and their issuance had been authorized by this Act. (n) Section 143. Correction of Mistakes Made by Applicant. - Whenever a mistake is made in a registration and such mistake occurred in good faith through the fault of the applicant, the Office may issue a certificate upon the payment of the prescribed fee: Provided, That the correction does not involve any change in the registration that requires republication of the mark. (n) Section 144. Classification of Goods and Services. - 144.1. Each registration, and any publication of the Office which concerns an application or registration effected by the Office shall indicate the goods or services by their names, grouped according to the classes of the Nice Classification, and each group shall be preceded by the number of the class of that Classification to which that group of goods or services belongs, presented in the order of the classes of the said Classification. 144.2. Goods or services may not be considered as being similar or dissimilar to each other on the ground that, in any registration or publication by the Office, they appear in different classes of the Nice Classification. (Sec. 6, R.A. No. 166a) Section 145. Duration. - A certificate of registration shall remain in force for ten (10) years: Provided, That the registrant shall file a declaration of actual use and evidence to that effect, or shall show valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to such use, as prescribed by the Regulations, within one (1) year from the fifth anniversary of the date of the registration of the mark. Otherwise, the mark shall be removed from the Register by the Office. (Sec. 12, R.A. No. 166a) Section 146. Renewal. - 146.1. A certificate of registration may be renewed for periods of ten (10) years at its expiration upon payment of the prescribed fee and upon filing of a request. The request shall contain the following indications: (a) An indication that renewal is sought; (b) The name and address of the registrant or his successor-in-interest, hereafter referred to as the "right holder"; (c) The registration number of the registration concerned; (d) The filing date of the application which resulted in the registration concerned to be renewed; (e) Where the right holder has a representative, the name and address of that representative; (f) The names of the recorded goods or services for which the renewal is requested or the names of the recorded goods or services for which the renewal is not requested, grouped according to the classes of the Nice Classification to which that group of goods or services belongs and presented in the order of the classes of the said Classification; and (g) A signature by the right holder or his representative. 146.2. Such request shall be in Filipino or English and may be made at any time within six (6) months before the expiration of the period for which the registration was issued or renewed, or it may be made within six (6) months after such expiration on payment of the additional fee herein prescribed. 146.3. If the Office refuses to renew the registration, it shall notify the registrant of his refusal and the reasons therefor. 146.4. An applicant for renewal not domiciled in the Philippines shall be subject to and comply with the requirements of this Act. (Sec. 15, R.A. No. 166a) Section 147. Rights Conferred. - 147.1. The owner of a registered mark shall have the exclusive right to prevent all third parties not having the owner's consent from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs or containers for goods or services which are identical or similar to those in respect of which the trademark is registered where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion. In case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed. 147.2. The exclusive right of the owner of a well-known mark defined in Subsection 123.1(e) which is registered in the Philippines, shall extend to goods and services which are not similar to those in respect of which the mark is registered: Provided, That use of that mark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection between those goods or services and the owner of the registered mark: Provided further, That the interests of the owner of the registered mark are likely to be damaged by such use. (n) Section 148. Use of Indications by Third Parties for Purposes Other than those for which the Mark is Used. - Registration of the mark shall not confer on the registered owner the right to preclude third parties from using bona fide their names, addresses, pseudonyms, a geographical name, or exact indications concerning the kind, quality, quantity, destination, value, place of origin, or time of production or of supply, of their goods or services: Provided, That such use is confined to the purposes of mere identification or information and cannot mislead the public as to the source of the goods or services. (n) Section 149. Assignment and Transfer of Application and Registration. - 149.1. An application for registration of a mark, or its registration, may be assigned or transferred with or without the transfer of the business using the mark. (n) 149.2. Such assignment or transfer shall, however, be null and void if it is liable to mislead the public, particularly as regards the nature, source, manufacturing process, characteristics, or suitability for their purpose, of the goods or services to which the mark is applied. 149.3. The assignment of the application for registration of a mark, or of its registration, shall be in writing and require the signatures of the contracting parties. Transfers by mergers or other forms of succession may be made by any document supporting such transfer. 149.4. Assignments and transfers of registrations of marks shall be recorded at the Office on payment of the prescribed fee; assignment and transfers of applications for registration shall, on payment of the same fee, be provisionally recorded, and the mark, when registered, shall be in the name of the assignee or transferee. 149.5. Assignments and transfers shall have no effect against third parties until they are recorded at the Office. (Sec. 31, R.A. No. 166a) Section 150. License Contracts. - 150.1. Any license contract concerning the registration of a mark, or an application therefor, shall provide for effective control by the licensor of the quality of the goods or services of the licensee in connection with which the mark is used. If the license contract does not provide for such quality control, or if such quality control is not effectively carried out, the license contract shall not be valid. 150.2. A license contract shall be submitted to the Office which shall keep its contents confidential but shall record it and publish a reference thereto. A license contract shall have no effect against third parties until such recording is effected. The Regulations shall fix the procedure for the recording of the license contract. (n) Section 151. Cancellation. - 151.1. A petition to cancel a registration of a mark under this Act may be filed with the Bureau of Legal Affairs by any person who believes that he is or will be damaged by the registration of a mark under this Act as follows: (a) Within five (5) years from the date of the registration of the mark under this Act. (b) At any time, if the registered mark becomes the generic name for the goods or services, or a portion thereof, for which it is registered, or has been abandoned, or its registration was obtained fraudulently or contrary to the provisions of this Act, or if the registered mark is being used by, or with the permission of, the registrant so as to misrepresent the source of the goods or services on or in connection with which the mark is used. If the registered mark becomes the generic name for less than all of the goods or services for which it is registered, a petition to cancel the registration for only those goods or services may be filed. A registered mark shall not be deemed to be the generic name of goods or services solely because such mark is also used as a name of or to identify a unique product or service. The primary significance of the registered mark to the relevant public rather than purchaser motivation shall be the test for determining whether the registered mark has become the generic name of goods or services on or in connection with which it has been used. (n) (c) At any time, if the registered owner of the mark without legitimate reason fails to use the mark within the Philippines, or to cause it to be used in the Philippines by virtue of a license during an uninterrupted period of three (3) years or longer. 151.2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the court or the administrative agency vested with jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate any action to enforce the rights to a registered mark shall likewise exercise jurisdiction to determine whether the registration of said mark may be cancelled in accordance with this Act. The filing of a suit to enforce the registered mark with the proper court or agency shall exclude any other court or agency from assuming jurisdiction over a subsequently filed petition to cancel the same mark. On the other hand, the earlier filing of petition to cancel the mark with the Bureau of Legal Affairs shall not constitute a prejudicial question that must be resolved before an action to enforce the rights to same registered mark may be decided. (Sec. 17, R.A. No. 166a) Section 152. Non-use of a Mark When Excused. - 152.1. Non-use of a mark may be excused if caused by circumstances arising independently of the will of the trademark owner. Lack of funds shall not excuse non-use of a mark. 152.2. The use of the mark in a form different from the form in which it is registered, which does not alter its distinctive character, shall not be ground for cancellation or removal of the mark and shall not diminish the protection granted to the mark. 152.3. The use of a mark in connection with one or more of the goods or services belonging to the class in respect of which the mark is registered shall prevent its cancellation or removal in respect of all other goods or services of the same class. 152.4. The use of a mark by a company related with the registrant or applicant shall inure to the latter's benefit, and such use shall not affect the validity of such mark or of its registration: Provided, That such mark is not used in such manner as to deceive the public. If use of a mark by a person is controlled by the registrant or applicant with respect to the nature and quality of the goods or services, such use shall inure to the benefit of the registrant or applicant. (n) Section 153. Requirements of Petition; Notice and Hearing. - Insofar as applicable, the petition for cancellation shall be in the same form as that provided in Section 134 hereof, and notice and hearing shall be as provided in Section 135 hereof. Section 154. Cancellation of Registration. - If the Bureau of Legal Affairs finds that a case for cancellation has been made out, it shall order the cancellation of the registration. When the order or judgment becomes final, any right conferred by such registration upon the registrant or any person in interest of record shall terminate. Notice of cancellation shall be published in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 19, R.A. No. 166a) Section 155. Remedies; Infringement. - Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner of the registered mark: 155.1. Use in commerce any reproduction, counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation of a registered mark or the same container or a dominant feature thereof in connection with the sale, offering for sale, distribution, advertising of any goods or services including other preparatory steps necessary to carry out the sale of any goods or services on or in connection with which such use is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive; or 155.2. Reproduce, counterfeit, copy or colorably imitate a registered mark or a dominant feature thereof and apply such reproduction, counterfeit, copy or colorable imitation to labels, signs, prints, packages, wrappers, receptacles or advertisements intended to be used in commerce upon or in connection with the sale, offering for sale, distribution, or advertising of goods or services on or in connection with which such use is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive, shall be liable in a civil action for infringement by the registrant for the remedies hereinafter set forth: Provided, That the infringement takes place at the moment any of the acts stated in Subsection 155.1 or this subsection are committed regardless of whether there is actual sale of goods or services using the infringing material. (Sec. 22, R.A. No 166a) Section 156. Actions, and Damages and Injunction for Infringement. - 156.1. The owner of a registered mark may recover damages from any person who infringes his rights, and the measure of the damages suffered shall be either the reasonable profit which the complaining party would have made, had the defendant not infringed his rights, or the profit which the defendant actually made out of the infringement, or in the event such measure of damages cannot be readily ascertained with reasonable certainty, then the court may award as damages a reasonable percentage based upon the amount of gross sales of the defendant or the value of the services in connection with which the mark or trade name was used in the infringement of the rights of the complaining party. (Sec. 23, first par., R.A. No. 166a) 156.2. On application of the complainant, the court may impound during the pendency of the action, sales invoices and other documents evidencing sales. (n) 156.3. In cases where actual intent to mislead the public or to defraud the complainant is shown, in the discretion of the court, the damages may be doubled. (Sec. 23, first par., R.A. No. 166) 156.4. The complainant, upon proper showing, may also be granted injunction. (Sec. 23, second par., R.A. No. 166a) Section 157. Power of Court to Order Infringing Material Destroyed. - 157.1 In any action arising under this Act, in which a violation of any right of the owner of the registered mark is established, the court may order that goods found to be infringing be, without compensation of any sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any harm caused to the right holder, or destroyed; and all labels, signs, prints, packages, wrappers, receptacles and advertisements in the possession of the defendant, bearing the registered mark or trade name or any reproduction, counterfeit, copy or colorable imitation thereof, all plates, molds, matrices and other means of making the same, shall be delivered up and destroyed. 157.2. In regard to counterfeit goods, the simple removal of the trademark affixed shall not be sufficient other than in exceptional cases which shall be determined by the Regulations, to permit the release of the goods into the channels of commerce. (Sec. 24, R.A. No. 166a) Section 158. Damages; Requirement of Notice. - In any suit for infringement, the owner of the registered mark shall not be entitled to recover profits or damages unless the acts have been committed with knowledge that such imitation is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive. Such knowledge is presumed if the registrant gives notice that his mark is registered by displaying with the mark the words '"Registered Mark" or the letter R within a circle or if the defendant had otherwise actual notice of the registration. (Sec. 21, R.A. No. 166a) Section 159. Limitations to Actions for Infringement. - Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the remedies given to the owner of a right infringed under this Act shall be limited as follows: 159.1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 155 hereof, a registered mark shall have no effect against any person who, in good faith, before the filing date or the priority date, was using the mark for the purposes of his business or enterprise: Provided, That his right may only be transferred or assigned together with his enterprise or business or with that part of his enterprise or business in which the mark is used. 159.2. Where an infringer who is engaged solely in the business of printing the mark or other infringing materials for others is an innocent infringer, the owner of the right infringed shall be entitled as against such infringer only to an injunction against future printing. 159.3. Where the infringement complained of is contained in or is part of paid advertisement in a newspaper, magazine, or other similar periodical or in an electronic communication, the remedies of the owner of the right infringed as against the publisher or distributor of such newspaper, magazine, or other similar periodical or electronic communication shall be limited to an injunction against the presentation of such advertising matter in future issues of such newspapers, magazines, or other similar periodicals or in future transmissions of such electronic communications. The limitations of this subparagraph shall apply only to innocent infringers: Provided, That such injunctive relief shall not be available to the owner of the right infringed with respect to an issue of a newspaper, magazine, or other similar periodical or an electronic communication containing infringing matter where restraining the dissemination of such infringing matter in any particular issue of such periodical or in an electronic communication would delay the delivery of such issue or transmission of such electronic communication is customarily conducted in accordance with the sound business practice, and not due to any method or device adopted to evade this section or to prevent or delay the issuance of an injunction or restraining order with respect to such infringing matter. (n) Section 160. Right of Foreign Corporation to Sue in Trademark or Service Mark Enforcement Action. - Any foreign national or juridical person who meets the requirements of Section 3 of this Act and does not engage in business in the Philippines may bring a civil or administrative action hereunder for opposition, cancellation, infringement, unfair competition, or false designation of origin and false description, whether or not it is licensed to do business in the Philippines under existing laws. (Sec. 21-A, R.A. No. 166a) Section 161. Authority to Determine Right to Registration. - In any action involving a registered mark, the court may determine the right to registration, order the cancellation of a registration, in whole or in part, and otherwise rectify the register with respect to the registration of any party to the action in the exercise of this. Judgment and orders shall be certified by the court to the Director, who shall make appropriate entry upon the records of the Bureau, and shall be controlled thereby. (Sec. 25, R.A. No. 166a) Section 162. Action for False or Fraudulent Declaration. - Any person who shall procure registration in the Office of a mark by a false or fraudulent declaration or representation, whether oral or in writing, or by any false means, shall be liable in a civil action by any person injured thereby for any damages sustained in consequence thereof (Sec. 26, R.A. No. 166) Section 163. Jurisdiction of Court. - All actions under Sections 150, 155, 164, and 166 to 169 shall be brought before the proper courts with appropriate jurisdiction under existing laws. (Sec. 27, R.A. No. 166) Section 164. Notice of Filing Suit Given to the Director. - It shall be the duty of the clerks of such courts within one (1) month after the filing of any action, suit, or proceeding involving a mark registered under the provisions of this Act, to notify the Director in writing setting forth: the names and addresses of the litigants and designating the number of the registration or registrations and within one (1) month after the judgment is entered or an appeal is taken, the clerk of court shall give notice thereof to the Office, and the latter shall endorse the same upon the filewrapper of the said registration or registrations and incorporate the same as a part of the contents of said filewrapper. (n) Section 165. Trade Names or Business Names. - 165.1. A name or designation may not be used as a trade name if by its nature or the use to which such name or designation may be put, it is contrary to public order or morals and if, in particular, it is liable to deceive trade circles or the public as to the nature of the enterprise identified by that name. 165.2.(a) Notwithstanding any laws or regulations providing for any obligation to register trade names, such names shall be protected, even prior to or without registration, against any unlawful act committed by third parties. (b) In particular, any subsequent use of the trade name by a third party, whether as a trade name or a mark or collective mark, or any such use of a similar trade name or mark, likely to mislead the public, shall be deemed unlawful. 165.3. The remedies provided for in Sections 153 to 156 and Sections 166 and 167 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 165.4. Any change in the ownership of a trade name shall be made with the transfer of the enterprise or part thereof identified by that name. The provisions of Subsections 149.2 to 149.4 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 166. Goods Bearing Infringing Marks or Trade Names. - No article of imported merchandise which shall copy or simulate the name of any domestic product, or manufacturer, or dealer, or which shall copy or simulate a mark registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act, or shall bear a mark or trade name calculated to induce the public to believe that the article is manufactured in the Philippines, or that it is manufactured in any foreign country or locality other than the country or locality where it is in fact manufactured, shall be admitted to entry at any customhouse of the Philippines. In order to aid the officers of the customs service in enforcing this prohibition, any person who is entitled to the benefits of this Act, may require that his name and residence, and the name of the locality in which his goods are manufactured, a copy of the certificate of registration of his mark or trade name, to be recorded in books which shall be kept for this purpose in the Bureau of Customs, under such regulations as the Collector of Customs with the approval of the Secretary of Finance shall prescribe, and may furnish to the said Bureau facsimiles of his name, the name of the locality in which his goods are manufactured, or his registered mark or trade name, and thereupon the Collector of Customs shall cause one (1) or more copies of the same to be transmitted to each collector or to other proper officer of the Bureau of Customs. (Sec. 35, R.A. No. 166) Section 167. Collective Marks. - 167.1. Subject to Subsections 167.2 and 167.3, Sections 122 to 164 and 166 shall apply to collective marks, except that references therein to "mark" shall be read as "collective mark". 167.2.(a) An application for registration of a collective mark shall designate the mark as a collective mark and shall be accompanied by a copy of the agreement, if any, governing the use of the collective mark. (b) The registered owner of a collective mark shall notify the Director of any changes made in respect of the agreement referred to in paragraph (a). 167.3. In addition to the grounds provided in Section 149, the Court shall cancel the registration of a collective mark if the person requesting the cancellation proves that only the registered owner uses the mark, or that he uses or permits its use in contravention of the agreements referred to in Subsection 166.2 or that he uses or permits its use in a manner liable to deceive trade circles or the public as to the origin or any other common characteristics of the goods or services concerned. 167.4. The registration of a collective mark, or an application therefor shall not be the subject of a license contract. (Sec. 40, R.A. No. 166a) Section 168. Unfair Competition, Rights, Regulation and Remedies. - 168.1. A person who has identified in the mind of the public the goods he manufactures or deals in, his business or services from those of others, whether or not a registered mark is employed, has a property right in the goodwill of the said goods, business or services so identified, which will be protected in the same manner as other property rights. 168.2. Any person who shall employ deception or any other means contrary to good faith by which he shall pass off the goods manufactured by him or in which he deals, or his business, or services for those of the one having established such goodwill, or who shall commit any acts calculated to produce said result, shall be guilty of unfair competition, and shall be subject to an action therefor. 168.3. In particular, and without in any way limiting the scope of protection against unfair competition, the following shall be deemed guilty of unfair competition: (a) Any person, who is selling his goods and gives them the general appearance of goods of another manufacturer or dealer, either as to the goods themselves or in the wrapping of the packages in which they are contained, or the devices or words thereon, or in any other feature of their appearance, which would be likely to influence purchasers to believe that the goods offered are those of a manufacturer or dealer, other than the actual manufacturer or dealer, or who otherwise clothes the goods with such appearance as shall deceive the public and defraud another of his legitimate trade, or any subsequent vendor of such goods or any agent of any vendor engaged in selling such goods with a like purpose; (b) Any person who by any artifice, or device, or who employs any other means calculated to induce the false belief that such person is offering the services of another who has identified such services in the mind of the public; or (c) Any person who shall make any false statement in the course of trade or who shall commit any other act contrary to good faith of a nature calculated to discredit the goods, business or services of another. 168.4. The remedies provided by Sections 156, 157 and 161 shall apply mutatis mutandis. (Sec. 29, R.A. No. 166a) Section 169. False Designations of Origin; False Description or Representation. - 169.1. Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or services, or any container for goods, uses in commerce any word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof, or any false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact, or false or misleading representation of fact, which: (a) Is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive as to the affiliation, connection, or association of such person with another person, or as to the origin, sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods, services, or commercial activities by another person; or (b) In commercial advertising or promotion, misrepresents the nature, characteristics, qualities, or geographic origin of his or her or another person's goods, services, or commercial activities, shall be liable to a civil action for damages and injunction provided in Sections 156 and 157 of this Act by any person who believes that he or she is or is likely to be damaged by such act. 169.2. Any goods marked or labelled in contravention of the provisions of this Section shall not be imported into the Philippines or admitted entry at any customhouse of the Philippines. The owner, importer, or consignee of goods refused entry at any customhouse under this section may have any recourse under the customs revenue laws or may have the remedy given by this Act in cases involving goods refused entry or seized. (Sec. 30, R.A. No. 166a) Section 170. Penalties. - Independent of the civil and administrative sanctions imposed by law, a criminal penalty of imprisonment from two (2) years to five (5) years and a fine ranging from Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) to Two hundred thousand pesos(P200,000), shall be imposed on any person who is found guilty of committing any of the acts mentioned in Section 155, Section 168 and Subsection 169.1. (Arts. 188 and 189, Revised Penal Code) PART IV THE LAW ON COPYRIGHT CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS Section 171. Definitions. - For the purpose of this Act, the following terms have the following meaning: 171.1. "Author" is the natural person who has created the work; 171.2. A "collective work" is a work which has been created by two (2) or more natural persons at the initiative and under the direction of another with the understanding that it will be disclosed by the latter under his own name and that contributing natural persons will not be identified; 171.3. "Communication to the public" or "communicate to the public" means the making of a work available to the public by wire or wireless means in such a way that members of the public may access these works from a place and time individually chosen by them; 171.4. A "computer" is an electronic or similar device having information-processing capabilities, and a "computer program" is a set of instructions expressed in words, codes, schemes or in any other form, which is capable when incorporated in a medium that the computer can read, of causing the computer to perform or achieve a particular task or result; 171.5. "Public lending" is the transfer of possession of the original or a copy of a work or sound recording for a limited period, for non-profit purposes, by an institution the services of which are available to the public, such as public library or archive; 171.6. "Public performance", in the case of a work other than an audiovisual work, is the recitation, playing, dancing, acting or otherwise performing the work, either directly or by means of any device or process; in the case of an audiovisual work, the showing of its images in sequence and the making of the sounds accompanying it audible; and, in the case of a sound recording, making the recorded sounds audible at a place or at places where persons outside the normal circle of a family and that family's closest social acquaintances are or can be present, irrespective of whether they are or can be present at the same place and at the same time, or at different places and/or at different times, and where the performance can be perceived without the need for communication within the meaning of Subsection 171.3; 171.7. "Published works" means works, which, with the consent of the authors, are made available to the public by wire or wireless means in such a way that members of the public may access these works from a place and time individually chosen by them: Provided, That availability of such copies has been such, as to satisfy the reasonable requirements of the public, having regard to the nature of the work; 171.8. "Rental" is the transfer of the possession of the original or a copy of a work or a sound recording for a limited period of time, for profit-making purposes; 171.9. "Reproduction" is the making of one (1) or more copies of a work or a sound recording in any manner or form (Sec. 41 (E), P.D. No. 49 a); 171.10. A "work of applied art" is an artistic creation with utilitarian functions or incorporated in a useful article, whether made by hand or produced on an industrial scale; 171.11. A "work of the Government of the Philippines" is a work created by an officer or employee of the Philippine Government or any of its subdivisions and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations as a part of his regularly prescribed official duties. CHAPTER II ORIGINAL WORKS Section 172. Literary and Artistic Works. - 172.1. Literary and artistic works, hereinafter referred to as "works", are original intellectual creations in the literary and artistic domain protected from the moment of their creation and shall include in particular: (a) Books, pamphlets, articles and other writings; (b) Periodicals and newspapers; (c) Lectures, sermons, addresses, dissertations prepared for oral delivery, whether or not reduced in writing or other material form; (d) Letters; (e) Dramatic or dramatico-musical compositions; choreographic works or entertainment in dumb shows; (f) Musical compositions, with or without words; (g) Works of drawing, painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving, lithography or other works of art; models or designs for works of art; (h) Original ornamental designs or models for articles of manufacture, whether or not registrable as an industrial design, and other works of applied art; (i) Illustrations, maps, plans, sketches, charts and three-dimensional works relative to geography, topography, architecture or science; (j) Drawings or plastic works of a scientific or technical character; (k) Photographic works including works produced by a process analogous to photography; lantern slides; (l) Audiovisual works and cinematographic works and works produced by a process analogous to cinematography or any process for making audio-visual recordings; (m) Pictorial illustrations and advertisements; (n) Computer programs; and (o) Other literary, scholarly, scientific and artistic works. 172.2. Works are protected by the sole fact of their creation, irrespective of their mode or form of expression, as well as of their content, quality and purpose. (Sec. 2, P.D. No. 49a) CHAPTER III DERIVATIVE WORKS Section 173. Derivative Works. - 173.1. The following derivative works shall also be protected by copyright: (a) Dramatizations, translations, adaptations, abridgments, arrangements, and other alterations of literary or artistic works; and (b) Collections of literary, scholarly or artistic works, and compilations of data and other materials which are original by reason of the selection or coordination or arrangement of their contents. (Sec. 2, [P] and [Q], P.D. No. 49) 173.2. The works referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of Subsection 173.1 shall be protected as new works: Provided however, That such new work shall not affect the force of any subsisting copyright upon the original works employed or any part thereof, or be construed to imply any right to such use of the original works, or to secure or extend copyright in such original works. (Sec. 8, P.D. 49; Art. 10, TRIPS) Section 174. Published Edition of Work. - In addition to the right to publish granted by the author, his heirs, or assigns, the publisher shall have a copyright consisting merely of the right of reproduction of the typographical arrangement of the published edition of the work. (n) CHAPTER IV WORKS NOT PROTECTED Section 175. Unprotected Subject Matter. - Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 172 and 173, no protection shall extend, under this law, to any idea, procedure, system, method or operation, concept, principle, discovery or mere data as such, even if they are expressed, explained, illustrated or embodied in a work; news of the day and other miscellaneous facts having the character of mere items of press information; or any official text of a legislative, administrative or legal nature, as well as any official translation thereof (n) Section 176. Works of the Government. - 176.1. No copyright shall subsist in any work of the Government of the Philippines. However, prior approval of the government agency or office wherein the work is created shall be necessary for exploitation of such work for profit. Such agency or office may, among other things, impose as a condition the payment of royalties. No prior approval or conditions shall be required for the use of any purpose of statutes, rules and regulations, and speeches, lectures, sermons, addresses, and dissertations, pronounced, read or rendered in courts of justice, before administrative agencies, in deliberative assemblies and in meetings of public character. (Sec. 9, first par., P.D. No. 49) 176.2. The author of speeches, lectures, sermons, addresses, and dissertations mentioned in the preceding paragraphs shall have the exclusive right of making a collection of his works. (n) 176.3. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Government is not precluded from receiving and holding copyrights transferred to it by assignment, bequest or otherwise; nor shall publication or republication by the Government in a public document of any work in which copyright is subsisting be taken to cause any abridgment or annulment of the copyright or to authorize any use or appropriation of such work without the consent of the copyright owner. (Sec. 9, third par., P.D. No. 49) CHAPTER V COPYRIGHT OR ECONOMIC RIGHTS Section 177. Copyright or Economic Rights. - Subject to the provisions of Chapter VIII, copyright or economic rights shall consist of the exclusive right to carry out, authorize or prevent the following acts: 177.1. Reproduction of the work or substantial portion of the work; 177.2. Dramatization, translation, adaptation, abridgment, arrangement or other transformation of the work; 177.3. The first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale or other forms of transfer of ownership; 177.4. Rental of the original or a copy of an audiovisual or cinematographic work, a work embodied in a sound recording, a computer program, a compilation of data and other materials or a musical work in graphic form, irrespective of the ownership of the original or the copy which is the subject of the rental; (n) 177.5. Public display of the original or a copy of the work; 177.6. Public performance of the work; and 177.7. Other communication to the public of the work. (Sec. 5, P. D. No. 49a) CHAPTER VI OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHT Section 178. Rules on Copyright Ownership. - Copyright ownership shall be governed by the following rules: 178.1 Subject to the provisions of this section, in the case of original literary and artistic works, copyright shall belong to the author of the work; 178.2. In the case of works of joint authorship, the co-authors shall be the original owners of the copyright and in the absence of agreement, their rights shall be governed by the rules on co-ownership. If, however, a work of joint authorship consists of parts that can be used separately and the author of each part can be identified, the author of each part shall be the original owner of the copyright in the part that he has created; 178.3. In the case of work created by an author during and in the course of his employment, the copyright shall belong to: (a) The employee, if the creation of the object of copyright is not a part of his regular duties even if the employee uses the time, facilities and materials of the employer. (b) The employer, if the work is the result of the performance of his regularly-assigned duties, unless there is an agreement, express or implied, to the contrary. 178.4. In the case of a work commissioned by a person other than an employer of the author and who pays for it and the work is made in pursuance of the commission, the person who so commissioned the work shall have ownership of the work, but the copyright thereto shall remain with the creator, unless there is a written stipulation to the contrary; 178.5. In the case of audiovisual work, the copyright shall belong to the producer, the author of the scenario, the composer of the music, the film director, and the author of the work so adapted. However, subject to contrary or other stipulations among the creators, the producer shall exercise the copyright to an extent required for the exhibition of the work in any manner, except for the right to collect performing license fees for the performance of musical compositions, with or without words, which are incorporated into the work; and 178.6. In respect of letters, the copyright shall belong to the writer subject to the provisions of Article 723 of the Civil Code. (Sec. 6, P.D. No. 49a) Section 179. Anonymous and Pseudonymous Works. - For purposes of this Act, the publishers shall be deemed to represent the authors of articles and other writings published without the names of the authors or under pseudonyms, unless the contrary appears, or the pseudonyms or adopted name leaves no doubt as to the author's identity, or if the author of the anonymous works discloses his identity. (Sec. 7, P.D. 49) CHAPTER VII TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF COPYRIGHT Section 180. Rights of Assignee. - 180.1. The copyright may be assigned in whole or in part. Within the scope of the assignment, the assignee is entitled to all the rights and remedies which the assignor had with respect to the copyright. 180.2. The copyright is not deemed assigned inter vivos in whole or in part unless there is a written indication of such intention. 180.3. The submission of a literary, photographic or artistic work to a newspaper, magazine or periodical for publication shall constitute only a license to make a single publication unless a greater right is expressly granted. If two (2) or more persons jointly own a copyright or any part thereof, neither of the owners shall be entitled to grant licenses without the prior written consent of the other owner or owners. (Sec. 15, P.D. No. 49a) Section 181. Copyright and Material Object. - The copyright is distinct from the property in the material object subject to it. Consequently, the transfer or assignment of the copyright shall not itself constitute a transfer of the material object. Nor shall a transfer or assignment of the sole copy or of one or several copies of the work imply transfer or assignment of the copyright. (Sec. 16, P.D. No. 49) Section 182. Filing of Assignment or License. - An assignment or exclusive license may be filed in duplicate with the National Library upon payment of the prescribed fee for registration in books and records kept for the purpose. Upon recording, a copy of the instrument shall be returned to the sender with a notation of the fact of record. Notice of the record shall be published in the IPO Gazette. (Sec. 19, P.D. No. 49a) Section 183. Designation of Society. - The copyright owners or their heirs may designate a society of artists, writers or composers to enforce their economic rights and moral rights on their behalf. (Sec. 32, P.D. No. 49a) CHAPTER VIII LIMITATIONS ON COPYRIGHT Section 184. Limitations on Copyright. - 184.1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter V, the following acts shall not constitute infringement of copyright: (a) The recitation or performance of a work, once it has been lawfully made accessible to the public, if done privately and free of charge or if made strictly for a charitable or religious institution or society; (Sec. 10(1), P.D. No. 49) (b) The making of quotations from a published work if they are compatible with fair use and only to the extent justified for the purpose, including quotations from newspaper articles and periodicals in the form of press summaries: Provided, That the source and the name of the author, if appearing on the work, are mentioned; (Sec. 11, third par., P.D. No. 49) (c) The reproduction or communication to the public by mass media of articles on current political, social, economic, scientific or religious topic, lectures, addresses and other works of the same nature, which are delivered in public if such use is for information purposes and has not been expressly reserved: Provided, That the source is clearly indicated; (Sec. 11, P.D. No. 49) (d) The reproduction and communication to the public of literary, scientific or artistic works as part of reports of current events by means of photography, cinematography or broadcasting to the extent necessary for the purpose; (Sec. 12, P.D. No. 49) (e) The inclusion of a work in a publication, broadcast, or other communication to the public, sound recording or film, if such inclusion is made by way of illustration for teaching purposes and is compatible with fair use: Provided, That the source and of the name of the author, if appearing in the work, are mentioned; (f) The recording made in schools, universities, or educational institutions of a work included in a broadcast for the use of such schools, universities or educational institutions: Provided, That such recording must be deleted within a reasonable period after they were first broadcast: Provided, further, That such recording may not be made from audiovisual works which are part of the general cinema repertoire of feature films except for brief excerpts of the work; (g) The making of ephemeral recordings by a broadcasting organization by means of its own facilities and for use in its own broadcast; (h) The use made of a work by or under the direction or control of the Government, by the National Library or by educational, scientific or professional institutions where such use is in the public interest and is compatible with fair use; (i) The public performance or the communication to the public of a work, in a place where no admission fee is charged in respect of such public performance or communication, by a club or institution for charitable or educational purpose only, whose aim is not profit making, subject to such other limitations as may be provided in the Regulations; (n) (j) Public display of the original or a copy of the work not made by means of a film, slide, television image or otherwise on screen or by means of any other device or process: Provided, That either the work has been published, or, that the original or the copy displayed has been sold, given away or otherwise transferred to another person by the author or his successor in title; and (k) Any use made of a work for the purpose of any judicial proceedings or for the giving of professional advice by a legal practitioner. 184.2. The provisions of this section shall be interpreted in such a way as to allow the work to be used in a manner which does not conflict with the normal exploitation of the work and does not unreasonably prejudice the right holder's legitimate interests. Section 185. Fair Use of a Copyrighted Work. - 185.1. The fair use of a copyrighted work for criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching including multiple copies for classroom use, scholarship, research, and similar purposes is not an infringement of copyright. Decompilation, which is understood here to be the reproduction of the code and translation of the forms of the computer program to achieve the inter-operability of an independently created computer program with other programs may also constitute fair use. In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is fair use, the factors to be considered shall include: (a) The purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for non-profit educational purposes; (b) The nature of the copyrighted work; (c) The amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (d) The effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work. 185.2. The fact that a work is unpublished shall not by itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the above factors. Section 186. Work of Architecture. - Copyright in a work of architecture shall include the right to control the erection of any building which reproduces the whole or a substantial part of the work either in its original form or in any form recognizably derived from the original: Provided, That the copyright in any such work shall not include the right to control the reconstruction or rehabilitation in the same style as the original of a building to which that copyright relates. (n) Section 187. Reproduction of Published Work. - 187.1. Notwithstanding the provision of Section 177, and subject to the provisions of Subsection 187.2, the private reproduction of a published work in a single copy, where the reproduction is made by a natural person exclusively for research and private study, shall be permitted, without the authorization of the owner of copyright in the work. 187.2. The permission granted under Subsection 187.1 shall not extend to the reproduction of: (a) A work of architecture in the form of building or other construction; (b) An entire book, or a substantial part thereof, or of a musical work in graphic form by reprographic means; (c) A compilation of data and other materials; (d) A computer program except as provided in Section 189; and (e) Any work in cases where reproduction would unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the work or would otherwise unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the author. (n) Section 188. Reprographic Reproduction by Libraries. - 188.1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 177.6, any library or archive whose activities are not for profit may, without the authorization of the author of copyright owner, make a single copy of the work by reprographic reproduction: (a) Where the work by reason of its fragile character or rarity cannot be lent to user in its original form; (b) Where the works are isolated articles contained in composite works or brief portions of other published works and the reproduction is necessary to supply them, when this is considered expedient, to persons requesting their loan for purposes of research or study instead of lending the volumes or booklets which contain them; and (c) Where the making of such a copy is in order to preserve and, if necessary in the event that it is lost, destroyed or rendered unusable, replace a copy, or to replace, in the permanent collection of another similar library or archive, a copy which has been lost, destroyed or rendered unusable and copies are not available with the publisher. 188.2. Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall not be permissible to produce a volume of a work published in several volumes or to produce missing tomes or pages of magazines or similar works, unless the volume, tome or part is out of stock: Provided, That every library which, by law, is entitled to receive copies of a printed work, shall be entitled, when special reasons so require, to reproduce a copy of a published work which is considered necessary for the collection of the library but which is out of stock. (Sec. 13, P.D. 49a) Section 189. Reproduction of Computer Program. - 189.1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 177, the reproduction in one (1) back-up copy or adaptation of a computer program shall be permitted, without the authorization of the author of, or other owner of copyright in, a computer program, by the lawful owner of that computer program: Provided, That the copy or adaptation is necessary for: (a) The use of the computer program in conjunction with a computer for the purpose, and to the extent, for which the computer program has been obtained; and (b) Archival purposes, and, for the replacement of the lawfully owned copy of the computer program in the event that the lawfully obtained copy of the computer program is lost, destroyed or rendered unusable. 189.2. No copy or adaptation mentioned in this Section shall be used for any purpose other than the ones determined in this Section, and any such copy or adaptation shall be destroyed in the event that continued possession of the copy of the computer program ceases to be lawful. 189.3. This provision shall be without prejudice to the application of Section 185 whenever appropriate. (n) Section 190. Importation for Personal Purposes. - 190.1. Notwithstanding the provision of Subsection 177.6, but subject to the limitation under the Subsection 185.2, the importation of a copy of a work by an individual for his personal purposes shall be permitted without the authorization of the author of, or other owner of copyright in, the work under the following circumstances: (a) When copies of the work are not available in the Philippines and: (i) Not more than one (1) copy at one time is imported for strictly individual use only; or (ii) The importation is by authority of and for the use of the Philippine Government; or (iii) The importation, consisting of not more than three (3) such copies or likenesses in any one invoice, is not for sale but for the use only of any religious, charitable, or educational society or institution duly incorporated or registered, or is for the encouragement of the fine arts, or for any state school, college, university, or free public library in the Philippines. (b) When such copies form parts of libraries and personal baggage belonging to persons or families arriving from foreign countries and are not intended for sale: Provided, That such copies do not exceed three (3). 190.2. Copies imported as allowed by this Section may not lawfully be used in any way to violate the rights of owner the copyright or annul or limit the protection secured by this Act, and such unlawful use shall be deemed an infringement and shall be punishable as such without prejudice to the proprietor's right of action. 190.3. Subject to the approval of the Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner of Customs is hereby empowered to make rules and regulations for preventing the importation of articles the importation of which is prohibited under this Section and under treaties and conventions to which the Philippines may be a party and for seizing and condemning and disposing of the same in case they are discovered after they have been imported. (Sec. 30, P.D. No. 49) CHAPTER IX DEPOSIT AND NOTICE Section 191. Registration and Deposit with National Library and the Supreme Court Library. - After the first public dissemination of performance by authority of the copyright owner of a work falling under Subsections 172.1, 172.2 and 172.3 of this Act, there shall, for the purpose of completing the records of the National Library and the Supreme Court Library, within three (3) weeks, be registered and deposited with it, by personal delivery or by registered mail two (2) complete copies or reproductions of the work in such form as the directors of said libraries may prescribe. A certificate of deposit shall be issued for which the prescribed fee shall be collected and the copyright owner shall be exempt from making additional deposit of the works with the National Library and the Supreme Court Library under other laws. If, within three (3) weeks after receipt by the copyright owner of a written demand from the directors for such deposit, the required copies or reproductions are not delivered and the fee is not paid, the copyright owner shall be liable to pay a fine equivalent to the required fee per month of delay and to pay to the National Library and the Supreme Court Library the amount of the retail price of the best edition of the work. Only the above mentioned classes of work shall be accepted for deposit by the National Library and the Supreme Court Library. (Sec. 26, P.D. No. 49a) Section 192. Notice of Copyright. - Each copy of a work published or offered for sale may contain a notice bearing the name of the copyright owner, and the year of its first publication, and, in copies produced after the creator's death, the year of such death. (Sec. 27, P.D. No. 49a) CHAPTER X MORAL RIGHTS Section 193. Scope of Moral Rights. - The author of a work shall, independently of the economic rights in Section 177 or the grant of an assignment or license with respect to such right, have the right: 193.1. To require that the authorship of the works be attributed to him, in particular, the right that his name, as far as practicable, be indicated in a prominent way on the copies, and in connection with the public use of his work; 193.2. To make any alterations of his work prior to, or to withhold it from publication; 193.3. To object to any distortion, mutilation or other modification of, or other derogatory action in relation to, his work which would be prejudicial to his honor or reputation; and 193.4. To restrain the use of his name with respect to any work not of his own creation or in a distorted version of his work. (Sec. 34, P.D. No. 49) Section 194. Breach of Contract. - An author cannot be compelled to perform his contract to create a work or for the publication of his work already in existence. However, he may be held liable for damages for breach of such contract. (Sec. 35, P.D. No. 49) Section 195. Waiver of Moral Rights. - An author may waive his rights mentioned in Section 193 by a written instrument, but no such waiver shall be valid where its effects is to permit another: 195.1. To use the name of the author, or the title of his work, or otherwise to make use of his reputation with respect to any version or adaptation of his work which, because of alterations therein, would substantially tend to injure the literary or artistic reputation of another author; or 195.2. To use the name of the author with respect to a work he did not create. (Sec. 36, P.D. No. 49) Section 196. Contribution to Collective Work. - When an author contributes to a collective work, his right to have his contribution attributed to him is deemed waived unless he expressly reserves it. (Sec. 37, P.D. No. 49) Section 197. Editing, Arranging and Adaptation of Work. - In the absence of a contrary stipulation at the time an author licenses or permits another to use his work, the necessary editing, arranging or adaptation of such work, for publication, broadcast, use in a motion picture, dramatization, or mechanical or electrical reproduction in accordance with the reasonable and customary standards or requirements of the medium in which the work is to be used, shall not be deemed to contravene the author's rights secured by this chapter. Nor shall complete destruction of a work unconditionally transferred by the author be deemed to violate such rights. (Sec. 38, P.D. No. 49) Section 198. Term of Moral Rights. - 198.1. The rights of an author under this chapter shall last during the lifetime of the author and for fifty (50) years after his death and shall not be assignable or subject to license. The person or persons to be charged with the posthumous enforcement of these rights shall be named in writing to be filed with the National Library. In default of such person or persons, such enforcement shall devolve upon either the author's heirs, and in default of the heirs, the Director of the National Library. 198.2. For purposes of this Section, "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or society.1aphi1 The Director of the National Library may prescribe reasonable fees to be charged for his services in the application of provisions of this Section. (Sec. 39, P.D. No. 49) Section 199. Enforcement Remedies. - Violation of any of the rights conferred by this Chapter shall entitle those charged with their enforcement to the same rights and remedies available to a copyright owner. In addition, damages which may be availed of under the Civil Code may also be recovered. Any damage recovered after the creator's death shall be held in trust for and remitted to his heirs, and in default of the heirs, shall belong to the government. (Sec. 40, P D No. 49) CHAPTER XI RIGHTS TO PROCEEDS IN SUBSEQUENT TRANSFERS Section 200. Sale or Lease of Work. - In every sale or lease of an original work of painting or sculpture or of the original manuscript of a writer or composer, subsequent to the first disposition thereof by the author, the author or his heirs shall have an inalienable right to participate in the gross proceeds of the sale or lease to the extent of five percent (5%). This right shall exist during the lifetime of the author and for fifty (50) years after his death. (Sec. 31, P.D. No. 49) Section 201. Works Not Covered. - The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to prints, etchings, engravings, works of applied art, or works of similar kind wherein the author primarily derives gain from the proceeds of reproductions. (Sec. 33, P.D. No. 49) CHAPTER XII RIGHTS OF PERFORMERS, PRODUCERS OF SOUNDS RECORDINGS AND BROADCASTING ORGANIZATIONS Section 202. Definitions. - For the purpose of this Act, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 202.1. "Performers" are actors, singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, sing, declaim, play in, interpret, or otherwise perform literary and artistic work; 202.2. "Sound recording" means the fixation of the sounds of a performance or of other sounds, or representation of sound, other than in the form of a fixation incorporated in a cinematographic or other audiovisual work; 202.3. An "audiovisual work or fixation" is a work that consists of a series of related images which impart the impression of motion, with or without accompanying sounds, susceptible of being made visible and, where accompanied by sounds, susceptible of being made audible; 202.4. "Fixation" means the embodiment of sounds, or of the representations thereof, from which they can be perceived, reproduced or communicated through a device; 202. 5. "Producer of a sound recording" means the person, or the legal entity, who or which takes the initiative and has the responsibility for the first fixation of the sounds of a performance or other sounds, or the representation of sounds; 202.6. "Publication of a fixed performance or a sound recording" means the offering of copies of the fixed performance or the sound recording to the public, with the consent of the right holder: Provided, That copies are offered to the public in reasonable quality; 202.7. "Broadcasting" means the transmission by wireless means for the public reception of sounds or of images or of representations thereof; such transmission by satellite is also "broadcasting" where the means for decrypting are provided to the public by the broadcasting organization or with its consent; 202.8. "Broadcasting organization" shall include a natural person or a juridical entity duly authorized to engage in broadcasting; and 202.9 "Communication to the public of a performance or a sound recording" means the transmission to the public, by any medium, otherwise than by broadcasting, of sounds of a performance or the representations of sounds fixed in a sound recording. For purposes of Section 209, "communication to the public" includes making the sounds or representations of sounds fixed in a sound recording audible to the public. Section 203. Scope of Performers' Rights. - Subject to the provisions of Section 212, performers shall enjoy the following exclusive rights: 203.1. As regards their performances, the right of authorizing: (a) The broadcasting and other communication to the public of their performance; and (b) The fixation of their unfixed performance. 203.2. The right of authorizing the direct or indirect reproduction of their performances fixed in sound recordings, in any manner or form; 203.3. Subject to the provisions of Section 206, the right of authorizing the first public distribution of the original and copies of their performance fixed in the sound recording through sale or rental or other forms of transfer of ownership; 203.4. The right of authorizing the commercial rental to the public of the original and copies of their performances fixed in sound recordings, even after distribution of them by, or pursuant to the authorization by the performer; and 203.5. The right of authorizing the making available to the public of their performances fixed in sound recordings, by wire or wireless means, in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and time individually chosen by them. (Sec. 42, P.D. No. 49a) Section 204. Moral Rights of Performers. - 204.1. Independently of a performer's economic rights, the performer, shall, as regards his live aural performances or performances fixed in sound recordings, have the right to claim to be identified as the performer of his performances, except where the omission is dictated by the manner of the use of the performance, and to object to any distortion, mutilation or other modification of his performances that would be prejudicial to his reputation. 204.2. The rights granted to a performer in accordance with Subsection 203.1 shall be maintained and exercised fifty (50) years after his death, by his heirs, and in default of heirs, the government, where protection is claimed. (Sec. 43, P.D. No. 49) Section 205. Limitation on Right. - 205.1. Subject to the provisions of Section 206, once the performer has authorized the broadcasting or fixation of his performance, the provisions of Sections 203 shall have no further application. 205.2. The provisions of Section 184 and Section 185 shall apply mutatis mutandis to performers. (n) Section 206. Additional Remuneration for Subsequent Communications or Broadcasts. - Unless otherwise provided in the contract, in every communication to the public or broadcast of a performance subsequent to the first communication or broadcast thereof by the broadcasting organization, the performer shall be entitled to an additional remuneration equivalent to at least five percent (5%) of the original compensation he or she received for the first communication or broadcast. (n) Section 207. Contract Terms. - Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to deprive performers of the right to agree by contracts on terms and conditions more favorable for them in respect of any use of their performance. (n) CHAPTER XIII PRODUCERS OF SOUND RECORDINGS Section 208. Scope of Right. - Subject to the provisions of Section 212, producers of sound recordings shall enjoy the following exclusive rights: 208.1. The right to authorize the direct or indirect reproduction of their sound recordings, in any manner or form; the placing of these reproductions in the market and the right of rental or lending; 208.2. The right to authorize the first public distribution of the original and copies of their sound recordings through sale or rental or other forms of transferring ownership; and 208.3. The right to authorize the commercial rental to the public of the original and copies of their sound recordings, even after distribution by them by or pursuant to authorization by the producer. (Sec. 46, P.D. No. 49a) Section 209. Communication to the Public. - If a sound recording published for commercial purposes, or a reproduction of such sound recording, is used directly for broadcasting or for other communication to the public, or is publicly performed with the intention of making and enhancing profit, a single equitable remuneration for the performer or performers, and the producer of the sound recording shall be paid by the user to both the performers and the producer, who, in the absence of any agreement shall share equally. (Sec. 47, P.D. No. 49a) Section 210. Limitation of Right. - Sections 184 and 185 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the producer of sound recordings. (Sec. 48, P.D. No. 49a) CHAPTER XIV BROADCASTING ORGANIZATIONS Section 211. Scope of Right. - Subject to the provisions of Section 212, broadcasting organizations shall enjoy the exclusive right to carry out, authorize or prevent any of the following acts: 211.1. The rebroadcasting of their broadcasts; 211.2. The recording in any manner, including the making of films or the use of video tape, of their broadcasts for the purpose of communication to the public of television broadcasts of the same; and 211.3. The use of such records for fresh transmissions or for fresh recording. (Sec. 52, P.D. No. 49) CHAPTER XV LIMITATIONS ON PROTECTION Section 212. Limitations on Rights. - Sections 203, 208 and 209 shall not apply where the acts referred to in those Sections are related to: 212.1. The use by a natural person exclusively for his own personal purposes; 212.2. Using short excerpts for reporting current events; 212.3. Use solely for the purpose of teaching or for scientific research; and 212.4. Fair use of the broadcast subject to the conditions under Section 185. (Sec. 44, P.D. No. 49a) CHAPTER XVI TERM OF PROTECTION Section 213. Term of Protection. - 213.1. Subject to the provisions of Subsections 213.2 to 213.5, the copyright in works under Sections 172 and 173 shall be protected during the life of the author and for fifty (50) years after his death. This rule also applies to posthumous works. (Sec. 21, first sentence, P.D. No. 49a) 213.2. In case of works of joint authorship, the economic rights shall be protected during the life of the last surviving author and for fifty (50) years after his death. (Sec. 21, second sentence, P.D. No. 49) 213.3. In case of anonymous or pseudonymous works, the copyright shall be protected for fifty (50) years from the date on which the work was first lawfully published: Provided, That where, before the expiration of the said period, the author's identity is revealed or is no longer in doubt, the provisions of Subsections 213.1. and 213.2 shall apply, as the case may be: Provided, further, That such works if not published before shall be protected for fifty (50) years counted from the making of the work. (Sec. 23, P.D. No. 49) 213.4. In case of works of applied art the protection shall be for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date of making. (Sec. 24(B), P.D. No. 49a) 213.5. In case of photographic works, the protection shall be for fifty (50) years from publication of the work and, if unpublished, fifty (50) years from the making. (Sec. 24(C), P.D. 49a) 213.6. In case of audio-visual works including those produced by process analogous to photography or any process for making audio-visual recordings, the term shall be fifty (50) years from date of publication and, if unpublished, from the date of making. (Sec. 24(C), P.D. No. 49a) Section 214. Calculation of Term. - The term of protection subsequent to the death of the author provided in the preceding Section shall run from the date of his death or of publication, but such terms shall always be deemed to begin on the first day of January of the year following the event which gave rise to them. (Sec. 25, P.D. No. 49) Section 215. Term of Protection for Performers, Producers and Broadcasting Organizations. - 215.1. The rights granted to performers and producers of sound recordings under this law shall expire: (a) For performances not incorporated in recordings, fifty (50) years from the end of the year in which the performance took place; and (b) For sound or image and sound recordings and for performances incorporated therein, fifty (50) years from the end of the year in which the recording took place. 215.2. In case of broadcasts, the term shall be twenty (20) years from the date the broadcast took place. The extended term shall be applied only to old works with subsisting protection under the prior law. (Sec. 55, P.D. No. 49a) CHAPTER XVII INFRINGEMENT Section 216. Remedies for Infringement. - 216.1. Any person infringing a right protected under this law shall be liable: (a) To an injunction restraining such infringement. The court may also order the defendant to desist from an infringement, among others, to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce of imported goods that involve an infringement, immediately after customs clearance of such goods. (b) Pay to the copyright proprietor or his assigns or heirs such actual damages, including legal costs and other expenses, as he may have incurred due to the infringement as well as the profits the infringer may have made due to such infringement, and in proving profits the plaintiff shall be required to prove sales only and the defendant shall be required to prove every element of cost which he claims, or, in lieu of actual damages and profits, such damages which to the court shall appear to be just and shall not be regarded as penalty. (c) Deliver under oath, for impounding during the pendency of the action, upon such terms and conditions as the court may prescribe, sales invoices and other documents evidencing sales, all articles and their packaging alleged to infringe a copyright and implements for making them. (d) Deliver under oath for destruction without any compensation all infringing copies or devices, as well as all plates, molds, or other means for making such infringing copies as the court may order. (e) Such other terms and conditions, including the payment of moral and exemplary damages, which the court may deem proper, wise and equitable and the destruction of infringing copies of the work even in the event of acquittal in a criminal case. 216.2. In an infringement action, the court shall also have the power to order the seizure and impounding of any article which may serve as evidence in the court proceedings. (Sec. 28, P.D. No. 49a) Section 217. Criminal Penalties. - 217.1. Any person infringing any right secured by provisions of Part IV of this Act or aiding or abetting such infringement shall be guilty of a crime punishable by: (a) Imprisonment of one (1) year to three (3) years plus a fine ranging from Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) to One hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000) for the first offense. (b) Imprisonment of three (3) years and one (1) day to six (6) years plus a fine ranging from One hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000) to Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000) for the second offense. (c) Imprisonment of six (6) years and one (1) day to nine (9) years plus a fine ranging from five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000) to One million five hundred thousand pesos (P1,500,000) for the third and subsequent offenses. (d) In all cases, subsidiary imprisonment in cases of insolvency. 217.2. In determining the number of years of imprisonment and the amount of fine, the court shall consider the value of the infringing materials that the defendant has produced or manufactured and the damage that the copyright owner has suffered by reason of the infringement. 217.3. Any person who at the time when copyright subsists in a work has in his possession an article which he knows, or ought to know, to be an infringing copy of the work for the purpose of: (a) Selling, letting for hire, or by way of trade offering or exposing for sale, or hire, the article; (b) Distributing the article for purpose of trade, or for any other purpose to an extent that will prejudice the rights of the copyright owner in the work; or (c) Trade exhibit of the article in public, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment and fine as above mentioned. (Sec. 29, P.D. No. 49a) Section 218. Affidavit Evidence. - 218.1. In an action under this Chapter, an affidavit made before a notary public by or on behalf of the owner of the copyright in any work or other subject matter and stating that: (a) At the time specified therein, copyright subsisted in the work or other subject matter; (b) He or the person named therein is the owner of the copyright; and (c) The copy of the work or other subject matter annexed thereto is a true copy thereof, shall be admitted in evidence in any proceedings for an offense under this Chapter and shall be prima facie proof of the matters therein stated until the contrary is proved, and the court before which such affidavit is produced shall assume that the affidavit was made by or on behalf of the owner of the copyright. 218.2. In an action under this Chapter: (a) Copyright shall be presumed to subsist in the work or other subject matter to which the action relates if the defendant does not put in issue the question whether copyright subsists in the work or other subject matter; and (b) Where the subsistence of the copyright is established, the plaintiff shall be presumed to be the owner of the copyright if he claims to be the owner of the copyright and the defendant does not put in issue the question of his ownership. (c) Where the defendant, without good faith, puts in issue the questions of whether copyright subsists in a work or other subject matter to which the action relates, or the ownership of copyright in such work or subject matter, thereby occasioning unnecessary costs or delay in the proceedings, the court may direct that any costs to the defendant in respect of the action shall not be allowed by him and that any costs occasioned by the defendant to other parties shall be paid by him to such other parties. (n) Section 219. Presumption of Authorship. - 219.1. The natural person whose name is indicated on a work in the usual manner as the author shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed to be the author of the work. This provision shall be applicable even if the name is a pseudonym, where the pseudonym leaves no doubt as to the identity of the author. 219.2. The person or body corporate whose name appears on a audio-visual work in the usual manner shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed to be the maker of said work. (n) Section 220. International Registration of Works. - A statement concerning a work, recorded in an international register in accordance with an international treaty to which the Philippines is or may become a party, shall be construed as true until the contrary is proved except: 220.1. Where the statement cannot be valid under this Act or any other law concerning intellectual property. 220.2. Where the statement is contradicted by another statement recorded in the international register. (n) CHAPTER XVIII SCOPE OF APPLICATION Section 221. Points of Attachment for Works under Sections 172 and 173. - 221.1. The protection afforded by this Act to copyrightable works under Sections 172 and 173 shall apply to: (a) Works of authors who are nationals of, or have their habitual residence in, the Philippines; (b) Audio-visual works the producer of which has his headquarters or habitual residence in the Philippines; (c) Works of architecture erected in the Philippines or other artistic works incorporated in a building or other structure located in the Philippines; (d) Works first published in the Philippines; and (e) Works first published in another country but also published in the Philippines within thirty days, irrespective of the nationality or residence of the authors. 221.2. The provisions of this Act shall also apply to works that are to be protected by virtue of and in accordance with any international convention or other international agreement to which the Philippines is a party. (n) Section 222. Points of Attachment for Performers. - The provisions of this Act on the protection of performers shall apply to: 222.1. Performers who are nationals of the Philippines; 222.2. Performers who are not nationals of the Philippines but whose performances: (a) Take place in the Philippines; or (b) Are incorporated in sound recordings that are protected under this Act; or (c) Which has not been fixed in sound recording but are carried by broadcast qualifying for protection under this Act. (n) Section 223. Points of Attachment for Sound Recordings. - The provisions of this Act on the protection of sound recordings shall apply to: 223.1. Sound recordings the producers of which are nationals of the Philippines; and 223.2. Sound recordings that were first published in the Philippines. (n) Section 224. Points of Attachment for Broadcasts. - 224.1. The provisions of this Act on the protection of broadcasts shall apply to: (a) Broadcasts of broadcasting organizations the headquarters of which are situated in the Philippines; and (b) Broadcasts transmitted from transmitters situated in the Philippines. 224.2. The provisions of this Act shall also apply to performers who, and to producers of sound recordings and broadcasting organizations which, are to be protected by virtue of and in accordance with any international convention or other international agreement to which the Philippines is a party. (n) CHAPTER XIX INSTITUTION OF ACTIONS Section 225. Jurisdiction. - Without prejudice to the provisions of Subsection 7.1(c), actions under this Act shall be cognizable by the courts with appropriate jurisdiction under existing law. (Sec. 57, P.D. No. 49a) Section 226. Damages. - No damages may be recovered under this Act after four (4) years from the time the cause of action arose. (Sec. 58, P.D. No. 49) CHAPTER XX MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Section 227. Ownership of Deposit and Instruments. - All copies deposited and instruments in writing filed with the National Library and the Supreme Court Library in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall become the property of the Government. (Sec. 60, P.D. No. 49) Section 228. Public Records. - The section or division of the National Library and the Supreme Court Library charged with receiving copies and instruments deposited and with keeping records required under this Act and everything in it shall be opened to public inspection. The Director of the National Library is empowered to issue such safeguards and regulations as may be necessary to implement this Section and other provisions of this Act. (Sec. 61, P.D. No. 49) Section 229. Copyright Division; Fees. - The Copyright Section of the National Library shall be classified as a Division upon the effectivity of this Act. The National Library shall have the power to collect, for the discharge of its services under this Act, such fees as may be promulgated by it from time to time subject to the approval of the Department Head. (Sec. 62, P.D. 49a) PART V FINAL PROVISIONS Section 230. Equitable Principles to Govern Proceedings. - In all inter partes proceedings in the Office under this Act, the equitable principles of laches, estoppel, and acquiescence where applicable, may be considered and applied. (Sec. 9-A, R.A. No. 165) Section 231. Reverse Reciprocity of Foreign Laws. - Any condition, restriction, limitation, diminution, requirement, penalty or any similar burden imposed by the law of a foreign country on a Philippine national seeking protection of intellectual property rights in that country, shall reciprocally be enforceable upon nationals of said country, within Philippine jurisdiction. (n) Section 232. Appeals. - 232.1. Appeals from decisions of regular courts shall be governed by the Rules of Court. Unless restrained by a higher court, the judgment of the trial court shall be executory even pending appeal under such terms and conditions as the court may prescribe. 232.2. Unless expressly provided in this Act or other statutes, appeals from decisions of administrative officials shall be provided in the Regulations. (n) Section 233. Organization of the Office; Exemption from the Salary Standardization Law and the Attrition Law. - 233.1. The Office shall be organized within one (1) year after the approval of this Act. It shall not be subject to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7430. 233.2. The Office shall institute its own compensation structure: Provided, That the Office shall make its own system conform as closely as possible with the principles provided for under Republic Act No. 6758. (n) Section 234. Abolition of the Bureau of Patents, Trademarks, and Technology Transfer. - The Bureau of Patents, Trademarks, and Technology Transfer under the Department of Trade and Industry is hereby abolished. All unexpended funds and fees, fines, royalties and other charges collected for the calendar year, properties, equipment and records of the Bureau of Patents, Trademarks and Technology Transfer, and such personnel as may be necessary are hereby transferred to the Office. Personnel not absorbed or transferred to the Office shall enjoy the retirement benefits granted under existing law, otherwise, they shall be paid the equivalent of one month basic salary for every year of service, or the equivalent nearest fractions thereof favorable to them on the basis of the highest salary received.(n) Section 235. Applications Pending on Effective Date of Act. - 235.1. All applications for patents pending in the Bureau of Patents, Trademarks and Technology Transfer shall be proceeded with and patents thereon granted in accordance with the Acts under which said applications were filed, and said Acts are hereby continued to be enforced, to this extent and for this purpose only, notwithstanding the foregoing general repeal thereof: Provided, That applications for utility models or industrial designs pending at the effective date of this Act, shall be proceeded with in accordance with the provisions of this Act, unless the applicants elect to prosecute said applications in accordance with the Acts under which they were filed. 235.2. All applications for registration of marks or trade names pending in the Bureau of Patents, Trademarks and Technology Transfer at the effective date of this Act may be amended, if practicable to bring them under the provisions of this Act. The prosecution of such applications so amended and the grant of registrations thereon shall be proceeded with in accordance with the provisions of this Act. If such amendments are not made, the prosecution of said applications shall be proceeded with and registrations thereon granted in accordance with the Acts under which said applications were filed, and said Acts are hereby continued in force to this extent for this purpose only, notwithstanding the foregoing general repeal thereof (n) Section 236. Preservation of Existing Rights. - Nothing herein shall adversely affect the rights on the enforcement of rights in patents, utility models, industrial designs, marks and works, acquired in good faith prior to the effective date of this Act. (n) Section 237. Notification on Berne Appendix. - The Philippines shall by proper compliance with the requirements set forth under the Appendix of the Berne Convention (Paris Act, 1971) avail itself of the special provisions regarding developing countries, including provisions for licenses grantable by competent authority under the Appendix. (n) Section 238. Appropriations. - The funds needed to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be charged to the appropriations of the Bureau of Patents, Trademarks, and Technology Transfer under the current General Appropriations Act and the fees, fines, royalties and other charges collected by the Bureau for the calendar year pursuant to Sections 14.1 and 234 of this Act. Thereafter such sums as may be necessary for its continued implementations shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act. (n) Section 239. Repeals. - 239.1. All Acts and parts of Acts inconsistent herewith, more particularly Republic Act No. 165, as amended; Republic Act No. 166, as amended; and Articles 188 and 189 of the Revised Penal Code; Presidential Decree No. 49, including Presidential Decree No. 285, as amended, are hereby repealed. 239.2. Marks registered under Republic Act No. 166 shall remain in force but shall be deemed to have been granted under this Act and shall be due for renewal within the period provided for under this Act and, upon renewal shall be reclassified in accordance with the International Classification. Trade names and marks registered in the Supplemental Register under Republic Act No. 166 shall remain in force but shall no longer be subject to renewal. 239.3. The provisions of this Act shall apply to works in which copyright protection obtained prior to the effectivity of this Act is subsisting: Provided, That the application of this Act shall not result in the diminution of such protection. (n) Section 240. Separability. - If any provision of this Act or the application of such provision to any circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Act shall not be affected thereby. (n) Section 241. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect on 1 January 1998. (n) Approved: June 6, 1997"

"Republic Act No. 10173" -
"Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila Fifteenth Congress Second Regular Session Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, two thousand eleven. [REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10173] AN ACT PROTECTING INDIVIDUAL PERSONAL INFORMATION IN INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS IN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR, CREATING FOR THIS PURPOSE A NATIONAL PRIVACY COMMISSION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES Be it enacted, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 1. Short Title.  This Act shall be known as the Data Privacy Act of 2012. SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy.  It is the policy of the State to protect the fundamental human right of privacy, of communication while ensuring free flow of information to promote innovation and growth. The State recognizes the vital role of information and communications technology in nation-building and its inherent obligation to ensure that personal information in information and communications systems in the government and in the private sector are secured and protected. SEC. 3. Definition of Terms.  Whenever used in this Act, the following terms shall have the respective meanings hereafter set forth: (a) Commission shall refer to the National Privacy Commission created by virtue of this Act. (b) Consent of the data subject refers to any freely given, specific, informed indication of will, whereby the data subject agrees to the collection and processing of personal information about and/or relating to him or her. Consent shall be evidenced by written, electronic or recorded means. It may also be given on behalf of the data subject by an agent specifically authorized by the data subject to do so. (c) Data subject refers to an individual whose personal information is processed. (d) Direct marketing refers to communication by whatever means of any advertising or marketing material which is directed to particular individuals. (e) Filing system refers to any act of information relating to natural or juridical persons to the extent that, although the information is not processed by equipment operating automatically in response to instructions given for that purpose, the set is structured, either by reference to individuals or by reference to criteria relating to individuals, in such a way that specific information relating to a particular person is readily accessible. (f) Information and Communications System refers to a system for generating, sending, receiving, storing or otherwise processing electronic data messages or electronic documents and includes the computer system or other similar device by or which data is recorded, transmitted or stored and any procedure related to the recording, transmission or storage of electronic data, electronic message, or electronic document. (g) Personal information refers to any information whether recorded in a material form or not, from which the identity of an individual is apparent or can be reasonably and directly ascertained by the entity holding the information, or when put together with other information would directly and certainly identify an individual. (h) Personal information controller refers to a person or organization who controls the collection, holding, processing or use of personal information, including a person or organization who instructs another person or organization to collect, hold, process, use, transfer or disclose personal information on his or her behalf. The term excludes: (1) A person or organization who performs such functions as instructed by another person or organization; and (2) An individual who collects, holds, processes or uses personal information in connection with the individuals personal, family or household affairs. (i) Personal information processor refers to any natural or juridical person qualified to act as such under this Act to whom a personal information controller may outsource the processing of personal data pertaining to a data subject. (j) Processing refers to any operation or any set of operations performed upon personal information including, but not limited to, the collection, recording, organization, storage, updating or modification, retrieval, consultation, use, consolidation, blocking, erasure or destruction of data. (k) Privileged information refers to any and all forms of data which under the Rules of Court and other pertinent laws constitute privileged communication. (l) Sensitive personal information refers to personal information: (1) About an individuals race, ethnic origin, marital status, age, color, and religious, philosophical or political affiliations; (2) About an individuals health, education, genetic or sexual life of a person, or to any proceeding for any offense committed or alleged to have been committed by such person, the disposal of such proceedings, or the sentence of any court in such proceedings; (3) Issued by government agencies peculiar to an individual which includes, but not limited to, social security numbers, previous or current health records, licenses or its denials, suspension or revocation, and tax returns; and (4) Specifically established by an executive order or an act of Congress to be kept classified. SEC. 4. Scope.  This Act applies to the processing of all types of personal information and to any natural and juridical person involved in personal information processing including those personal information controllers and processors who, although not found or established in the Philippines, use equipment that are located in the Philippines, or those who maintain an office, branch or agency in the Philippines subject to the immediately succeeding paragraph: Provided, That the requirements of Section 5 are complied with. This Act does not apply to the following: (a) Information about any individual who is or was an officer or employee of a government institution that relates to the position or functions of the individual, including: (1) The fact that the individual is or was an officer or employee of the government institution; (2) The title, business address and office telephone number of the individual; (3) The classification, salary range and responsibilities of the position held by the individual; and (4) The name of the individual on a document prepared by the individual in the course of employment with the government; (b) Information about an individual who is or was performing service under contract for a government institution that relates to the services performed, including the terms of the contract, and the name of the individual given in the course of the performance of those services; (c) Information relating to any discretionary benefit of a financial nature such as the granting of a license or permit given by the government to an individual, including the name of the individual and the exact nature of the benefit; (d) Personal information processed for journalistic, artistic, literary or research purposes; (e) Information necessary in order to carry out the functions of public authority which includes the processing of personal data for the performance by the independent, central monetary authority and law enforcement and regulatory agencies of their constitutionally and statutorily mandated functions. Nothing in this Act shall be construed as to have amended or repealed Republic Act No. 1405, otherwise known as the Secrecy of Bank Deposits Act; Republic Act No. 6426, otherwise known as the Foreign Currency Deposit Act; and Republic Act No. 9510, otherwise known as the Credit Information System Act (CISA); (f) Information necessary for banks and other financial institutions under the jurisdiction of the independent, central monetary authority or Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas to comply with Republic Act No. 9510, and Republic Act No. 9160, as amended, otherwise known as the Anti-Money Laundering Act and other applicable laws; and (g) Personal information originally collected from residents of foreign jurisdictions in accordance with the laws of those foreign jurisdictions, including any applicable data privacy laws, which is being processed in the Philippines. SEC. 5. Protection Afforded to Journalists and Their Sources.  Nothing in this Act shall be construed as to have amended or repealed the provisions of Republic Act No. 53, which affords the publishers, editors or duly accredited reporters of any newspaper, magazine or periodical of general circulation protection from being compelled to reveal the source of any news report or information appearing in said publication which was related in any confidence to such publisher, editor, or reporter. SEC. 6. Extraterritorial Application.  This Act applies to an act done or practice engaged in and outside of the Philippines by an entity if: (a) The act, practice or processing relates to personal information about a Philippine citizen or a resident; (b) The entity has a link with the Philippines, and the entity is processing personal information in the Philippines or even if the processing is outside the Philippines as long as it is about Philippine citizens or residents such as, but not limited to, the following: (1) A contract is entered in the Philippines; (2) A juridical entity unincorporated in the Philippines but has central management and control in the country; and (3) An entity that has a branch, agency, office or subsidiary in the Philippines and the parent or affiliate of the Philippine entity has access to personal information; and (c) The entity has other links in the Philippines such as, but not limited to: (1) The entity carries on business in the Philippines; and (2) The personal information was collected or held by an entity in the Philippines. CHAPTER II THE NATIONAL PRIVACY COMMISSION SEC. 7. Functions of the National Privacy Commission.  To administer and implement the provisions of this Act, and to monitor and ensure compliance of the country with international standards set for data protection, there is hereby created an independent body to be known as the National Privacy Commission, which shall have the following functions: (a) Ensure compliance of personal information controllers with the provisions of this Act; (b) Receive complaints, institute investigations, facilitate or enable settlement of complaints through the use of alternative dispute resolution processes, adjudicate, award indemnity on matters affecting any personal information, prepare reports on disposition of complaints and resolution of any investigation it initiates, and, in cases it deems appropriate, publicize any such report: Provided, That in resolving any complaint or investigation (except where amicable settlement is reached by the parties), the Commission shall act as a collegial body. For this purpose, the Commission may be given access to personal information that is subject of any complaint and to collect the information necessary to perform its functions under this Act; (c) Issue cease and desist orders, impose a temporary or permanent ban on the processing of personal information, upon finding that the processing will be detrimental to national security and public interest; (d) Compel or petition any entity, government agency or instrumentality to abide by its orders or take action on a matter affecting data privacy; (e) Monitor the compliance of other government agencies or instrumentalities on their security and technical measures and recommend the necessary action in order to meet minimum standards for protection of personal information pursuant to this Act; (f) Coordinate with other government agencies and the private sector on efforts to formulate and implement plans and policies to strengthen the protection of personal information in the country; (g) Publish on a regular basis a guide to all laws relating to data protection; (h) Publish a compilation of agency system of records and notices, including index and other finding aids; (i) Recommend to the Department of Justice (DOJ) the prosecution and imposition of penalties specified in Sections 25 to 29 of this Act; (j) Review, approve, reject or require modification of privacy codes voluntarily adhered to by personal information controllers:Provided, That the privacy codes shall adhere to the underlying data privacy principles embodied in this Act: Provided, further,That such privacy codes may include private dispute resolution mechanisms for complaints against any participating personal information controller. For this purpose, the Commission shall consult with relevant regulatory agencies in the formulation and administration of privacy codes applying the standards set out in this Act, with respect to the persons, entities, business activities and business sectors that said regulatory bodies are authorized to principally regulate pursuant to the law: Provided, finally. That the Commission may review such privacy codes and require changes thereto for purposes of complying with this Act; (k) Provide assistance on matters relating to privacy or data protection at the request of a national or local agency, a private entity or any person; (l) Comment on the implication on data privacy of proposed national or local statutes, regulations or procedures, issue advisory opinions and interpret the provisions of this Act and other data privacy laws; (m) Propose legislation, amendments or modifications to Philippine laws on privacy or data protection as may be necessary; (n) Ensure proper and effective coordination with data privacy regulators in other countries and private accountability agents, participate in international and regional initiatives for data privacy protection; (o) Negotiate and contract with other data privacy authorities of other countries for cross-border application and implementation of respective privacy laws; (p) Assist Philippine companies doing business abroad to respond to foreign privacy or data protection laws and regulations; and (q) Generally perform such acts as may be necessary to facilitate cross-border enforcement of data privacy protection. SEC. 8. Confidentiality.  The Commission shall ensure at all times the confidentiality of any personal information that comes to its knowledge and possession. SEC. 9. Organizational Structure of the Commission.  The Commission shall be attached to the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) and shall be headed by a Privacy Commissioner, who shall also act as Chairman of the Commission. The Privacy Commissioner shall be assisted by two (2) Deputy Privacy Commissioners, one to be responsible for Data Processing Systems and one to be responsible for Policies and Planning. The Privacy Commissioner and the two (2) Deputy Privacy Commissioners shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines for a term of three (3) years, and may be reappointed for another term of three (3) years. Vacancies in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made. The Privacy Commissioner must be at least thirty-five (35) years of age and of good moral character, unquestionable integrity and known probity, and a recognized expert in the field of information technology and data privacy. The Privacy Commissioner shall enjoy the benefits, privileges and emoluments equivalent to the rank of Secretary. The Deputy Privacy Commissioners must be recognized experts in the field of information and communications technology and data privacy. They shall enjoy the benefits, privileges and emoluments equivalent to the rank of Undersecretary. The Privacy Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioners, or any person acting on their behalf or under their direction, shall not be civilly liable for acts done in good faith in the performance of their duties. However, he or she shall be liable for willful or negligent acts done by him or her which are contrary to law, morals, public policy and good customs even if he or she acted under orders or instructions of superiors: Provided, That in case a lawsuit is filed against such official on the subject of the performance of his or her duties, where such performance is lawful, he or she shall be reimbursed by the Commission for reasonable costs of litigation. SEC. 10. The Secretariat.  The Commission is hereby authorized to establish a Secretariat. Majority of the members of the Secretariat must have served for at least five (5) years in any agency of the government that is involved in the processing of personal information including, but not limited to, the following offices: Social Security System (SSS), Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), Land Transportation Office (LTO), Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), Commission on Elections (COMELEC), Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Department of Justice (DOJ), and Philippine Postal Corporation (Philpost). CHAPTER III PROCESSING OF PERSONAL INFORMATION SEC. 11. General Data Privacy Principles.  The processing of personal information shall be allowed, subject to compliance with the requirements of this Act and other laws allowing disclosure of information to the public and adherence to the principles of transparency, legitimate purpose and proportionality. Personal information must, be:, (a) Collected for specified and legitimate purposes determined and declared before, or as soon as reasonably practicable after collection, and later processed in a way compatible with such declared, specified and legitimate purposes only; (b) Processed fairly and lawfully; (c) Accurate, relevant and, where necessary for purposes for which it is to be used the processing of personal information, kept up to date; inaccurate or incomplete data must be rectified, supplemented, destroyed or their further processing restricted; (d) Adequate and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are collected and processed; (e) Retained only for as long as necessary for the fulfillment of the purposes for which the data was obtained or for the establishment, exercise or defense of legal claims, or for legitimate business purposes, or as provided by law; and (f) Kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which the data were collected and processed: Provided, That personal information collected for other purposes may lie processed for historical, statistical or scientific purposes, and in cases laid down in law may be stored for longer periods: Provided, further,That adequate safeguards are guaranteed by said laws authorizing their processing. The personal information controller must ensure implementation of personal information processing principles set out herein. SEC. 12. Criteria for Lawful Processing of Personal Information.  The processing of personal information shall be permitted only if not otherwise prohibited by law, and when at least one of the following conditions exists: (a) The data subject has given his or her consent; (b) The processing of personal information is necessary and is related to the fulfillment of a contract with the data subject or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract; (c) The processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the personal information controller is subject; (d) The processing is necessary to protect vitally important interests of the data subject, including life and health; (e) The processing is necessary in order to respond to national emergency, to comply with the requirements of public order and safety, or to fulfill functions of public authority which necessarily includes the processing of personal data for the fulfillment of its mandate; or (f) The processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the personal information controller or by a third party or parties to whom the data is disclosed, except where such interests are overridden by fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject which require protection under the Philippine Constitution. SEC. 13. Sensitive Personal Information and Privileged Information.  The processing of sensitive personal information and privileged information shall be prohibited, except in the following cases: (a) The data subject has given his or her consent, specific to the purpose prior to the processing, or in the case of privileged information, all parties to the exchange have given their consent prior to processing; (b) The processing of the same is provided for by existing laws and regulations: Provided, That such regulatory enactments guarantee the protection of the sensitive personal information and the privileged information: Provided, further, That the consent of the data subjects are not required by law or regulation permitting the processing of the sensitive personal information or the privileged information; (c) The processing is necessary to protect the life and health of the data subject or another person, and the data subject is not legally or physically able to express his or her consent prior to the processing; (d) The processing is necessary to achieve the lawful and noncommercial objectives of public organizations and their associations: Provided, That such processing is only confined and related to the bona fide members of these organizations or their associations: Provided, further, That the sensitive personal information are not transferred to third parties: Provided, finally, That consent of the data subject was obtained prior to processing; (e) The processing is necessary for purposes of medical treatment, is carried out by a medical practitioner or a medical treatment institution, and an adequate level of protection of personal information is ensured; or (f) The processing concerns such personal information as is necessary for the protection of lawful rights and interests of natural or legal persons in court proceedings, or the establishment, exercise or defense of legal claims, or when provided to government or public authority. SEC. 14. Subcontract of Personal Information.  A personal information controller may subcontract the processing of personal information: Provided, That the personal information controller shall be responsible for ensuring that proper safeguards are in place to ensure the confidentiality of the personal information processed, prevent its use for unauthorized purposes, and generally, comply with the requirements of this Act and other laws for processing of personal information. The personal information processor shall comply with all the requirements of this Act and other applicable laws. SEC. 15. Extension of Privileged Communication.  Personal information controllers may invoke the principle of privileged communication over privileged information that they lawfully control or process. Subject to existing laws and regulations, any evidence gathered on privileged information is inadmissible. CHAPTER IV RIGHTS OF THE DATA SUBJECT SEC. 16. Rights of the Data Subject.  The data subject is entitled to: (a) Be informed whether personal information pertaining to him or her shall be, are being or have been processed; (b) Be furnished the information indicated hereunder before the entry of his or her personal information into the processing system of the personal information controller, or at the next practical opportunity: (1) Description of the personal information to be entered into the system; (2) Purposes for which they are being or are to be processed; (3) Scope and method of the personal information processing; (4) The recipients or classes of recipients to whom they are or may be disclosed; (5) Methods utilized for automated access, if the same is allowed by the data subject, and the extent to which such access is authorized; (6) The identity and contact details of the personal information controller or its representative; (7) The period for which the information will be stored; and (8) The existence of their rights, i.e., to access, correction, as well as the right to lodge a complaint before the Commission. Any information supplied or declaration made to the data subject on these matters shall not be amended without prior notification of data subject: Provided, That the notification under subsection (b) shall not apply should the personal information be needed pursuant to a subpoena or when the collection and processing are for obvious purposes, including when it is necessary for the performance of or in relation to a contract or service or when necessary or desirable in the context of an employer-employee relationship, between the collector and the data subject, or when the information is being collected and processed as a result of legal obligation; (c) Reasonable access to, upon demand, the following: (1) Contents of his or her personal information that were processed; (2) Sources from which personal information were obtained; (3) Names and addresses of recipients of the personal information; (4) Manner by which such data were processed; (5) Reasons for the disclosure of the personal information to recipients; (6) Information on automated processes where the data will or likely to be made as the sole basis for any decision significantly affecting or will affect the data subject; (7) Date when his or her personal information concerning the data subject were last accessed and modified; and (8) The designation, or name or identity and address of the personal information controller; (d) Dispute the inaccuracy or error in the personal information and have the personal information controller correct it immediately and accordingly, unless the request is vexatious or otherwise unreasonable. If the personal information have been corrected, the personal information controller shall ensure the accessibility of both the new and the retracted information and the simultaneous receipt of the new and the retracted information by recipients thereof: Provided, That the third parties who have previously received such processed personal information shall he informed of its inaccuracy and its rectification upon reasonable request of the data subject; (e) Suspend, withdraw or order the blocking, removal or destruction of his or her personal information from the personal information controllers filing system upon discovery and substantial proof that the personal information are incomplete, outdated, false, unlawfully obtained, used for unauthorized purposes or are no longer necessary for the purposes for which they were collected. In this case, the personal information controller may notify third parties who have previously received such processed personal information; and (f) Be indemnified for any damages sustained due to such inaccurate, incomplete, outdated, false, unlawfully obtained or unauthorized use of personal information. SEC. 17. Transmissibility of Rights of the Data Subject.  The lawful heirs and assigns of the data subject may invoke the rights of the data subject for, which he or she is an heir or assignee at any time after the death of the data subject or when the data subject is incapacitated or incapable of exercising the rights as enumerated in the immediately preceding section. SEC. 18. Right to Data Portability.  The data subject shall have the right, where personal information is processed by electronic means and in a structured and commonly used format, to obtain from the personal information controller a copy of data undergoing processing in an electronic or structured format, which is commonly used and allows for further use by the data subject. The Commission may specify the electronic format referred to above, as well as the technical standards, modalities and procedures for their transfer. SEC. 19. Non-Applicability.  The immediately preceding sections are not applicable if the processed personal information are used only for the needs of scientific and statistical research and, on the basis of such, no activities are carried out and no decisions are taken regarding the data subject: Provided, That the personal information shall be held under strict confidentiality and shall be used only for the declared purpose. Likewise, the immediately preceding sections are not applicable to processing of personal information gathered for the purpose of investigations in relation to any criminal, administrative or tax liabilities of a data subject. CHAPTER V SECURITY OF PERSONAL INFORMATION SEC. 20. Security of Personal Information.  (a) The personal information controller must implement reasonable and appropriate organizational, physical and technical measures intended for the protection of personal information against any accidental or unlawful destruction, alteration and disclosure, as well as against any other unlawful processing. (b) The personal information controller shall implement reasonable and appropriate measures to protect personal information against natural dangers such as accidental loss or destruction, and human dangers such as unlawful access, fraudulent misuse, unlawful destruction, alteration and contamination. (c) The determination of the appropriate level of security under this section must take into account the nature of the personal information to be protected, the risks represented by the processing, the size of the organization and complexity of its operations, current data privacy best practices and the cost of security implementation. Subject to guidelines as the Commission may issue from time to time, the measures implemented must include: (1) Safeguards to protect its computer network against accidental, unlawful or unauthorized usage or interference with or hindering of their functioning or availability; (2) A security policy with respect to the processing of personal information; (3) A process for identifying and accessing reasonably foreseeable vulnerabilities in its computer networks, and for taking preventive, corrective and mitigating action against security incidents that can lead to a security breach; and (4) Regular monitoring for security breaches and a process for taking preventive, corrective and mitigating action against security incidents that can lead to a security breach. (d) The personal information controller must further ensure that third parties processing personal information on its behalf shall implement the security measures required by this provision. (e) The employees, agents or representatives of a personal information controller who are involved in the processing of personal information shall operate and hold personal information under strict confidentiality if the personal information are not intended for public disclosure. This obligation shall continue even after leaving the public service, transfer to another position or upon termination of employment or contractual relations. (f) The personal information controller shall promptly notify the Commission and affected data subjects when sensitive personal information or other information that may, under the circumstances, be used to enable identity fraud are reasonably believed to have been acquired by an unauthorized person, and the personal information controller or the Commission believes that such unauthorized acquisition is likely to give rise to a real risk of serious harm to any affected data subject. The notification shall at least describe the nature of the breach, the sensitive personal information possibly involved, and the measures taken by the entity to address the breach. Notification may be delayed only to the extent necessary to determine the scope of the breach, to prevent further disclosures, or to restore reasonable integrity to the information and communications system. (1) In evaluating if notification is unwarranted, the Commission may take into account compliance by the personal information controller with this section and existence of good faith in the acquisition of personal information. (2) The Commission may exempt a personal information controller from notification where, in its reasonable judgment, such notification would not be in the public interest or in the interests of the affected data subjects. (3) The Commission may authorize postponement of notification where it may hinder the progress of a criminal investigation related to a serious breach. CHAPTER VI ACCOUNTABILITY FOR TRANSFER OF PERSONAL INFORMATION SEC. 21. Principle of Accountability.  Each personal information controller is responsible for personal information under its control or custody, including information that have been transferred to a third party for processing, whether domestically or internationally, subject to cross-border arrangement and cooperation. (a) The personal information controller is accountable for complying with the requirements of this Act and shall use contractual or other reasonable means to provide a comparable level of protection while the information are being processed by a third party. (b) The personal information controller shall designate an individual or individuals who are accountable for the organizations compliance with this Act. The identity of the individual(s) so designated shall be made known to any data subject upon request. CHAPTER VII SECURITY OF SENSITIVE PERSONAL INFORMATION IN GOVERNMENT SEC. 22. Responsibility of Heads of Agencies.  All sensitive personal information maintained by the government, its agencies and instrumentalities shall be secured, as far as practicable, with the use of the most appropriate standard recognized by the information and communications technology industry, and as recommended by the Commission. The head of each government agency or instrumentality shall be responsible for complying with the security requirements mentioned herein while the Commission shall monitor the compliance and may recommend the necessary action in order to satisfy the minimum standards. SEC. 23. Requirements Relating to Access by Agency Personnel to Sensitive Personal Information.  (a) On-site and Online Access  Except as may be allowed through guidelines to be issued by the Commission, no employee of the government shall have access to sensitive personal information on government property or through online facilities unless the employee has received a security clearance from the head of the source agency. (b) Off-site Access  Unless otherwise provided in guidelines to be issued by the Commission, sensitive personal information maintained by an agency may not be transported or accessed from a location off government property unless a request for such transportation or access is submitted and approved by the head of the agency in accordance with the following guidelines: (1) Deadline for Approval or Disapproval  In the case of any request submitted to the head of an agency, such head of the agency shall approve or disapprove the request within two (2) business days after the date of submission of the request. In case there is no action by the head of the agency, then such request is considered disapproved; (2) Limitation to One thousand (1,000) Records  If a request is approved, the head of the agency shall limit the access to not more than one thousand (1,000) records at a time; and (3) Encryption  Any technology used to store, transport or access sensitive personal information for purposes of off-site access approved under this subsection shall be secured by the use of the most secure encryption standard recognized by the Commission. The requirements of this subsection shall be implemented not later than six (6) months after the date of the enactment of this Act. SEC. 24. Applicability to Government Contractors.  In entering into any contract that may involve accessing or requiring sensitive personal information from one thousand (1,000) or more individuals, an agency shall require a contractor and its employees to register their personal information processing system with the Commission in accordance with this Act and to comply with the other provisions of this Act including the immediately preceding section, in the same manner as agencies and government employees comply with such requirements. CHAPTER VIII PENALTIES SEC. 25. Unauthorized Processing of Personal Information and Sensitive Personal Information.  (a) The unauthorized processing of personal information shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from one (1) year to three (3) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Two million pesos (Php2,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who process personal information without the consent of the data subject, or without being authorized under this Act or any existing law. (b) The unauthorized processing of personal sensitive information shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from three (3) years to six (6) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Four million pesos (Php4,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who process personal information without the consent of the data subject, or without being authorized under this Act or any existing law. SEC. 26. Accessing Personal Information and Sensitive Personal Information Due to Negligence.  (a) Accessing personal information due to negligence shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from one (1) year to three (3) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Two million pesos (Php2,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who, due to negligence, provided access to personal information without being authorized under this Act or any existing law. (b) Accessing sensitive personal information due to negligence shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from three (3) years to six (6) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Four million pesos (Php4,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who, due to negligence, provided access to personal information without being authorized under this Act or any existing law. SEC. 27. Improper Disposal of Personal Information and Sensitive Personal Information.  (a) The improper disposal of personal information shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from six (6) months to two (2) years and a fine of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (Php100,000.00) but not more than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who knowingly or negligently dispose, discard or abandon the personal information of an individual in an area accessible to the public or has otherwise placed the personal information of an individual in its container for trash collection. (b) The improper disposal of sensitive personal information shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from one (1) year to three (3) years and a fine of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (Php100,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (Php1,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who knowingly or negligently dispose, discard or abandon the personal information of an individual in an area accessible to the public or has otherwise placed the personal information of an individual in its container for trash collection. SEC. 28. Processing of Personal Information and Sensitive Personal Information for Unauthorized Purposes.  The processing of personal information for unauthorized purposes shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from one (1) year and six (6) months to five (5) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (Php1,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons processing personal information for purposes not authorized by the data subject, or otherwise authorized under this Act or under existing laws. The processing of sensitive personal information for unauthorized purposes shall be penalized by imprisonment ranging from two (2) years to seven (7) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Two million pesos (Php2,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons processing sensitive personal information for purposes not authorized by the data subject, or otherwise authorized under this Act or under existing laws. SEC. 29. Unauthorized Access or Intentional Breach.  The penalty of imprisonment ranging from one (1) year to three (3) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Two million pesos (Php2,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who knowingly and unlawfully, or violating data confidentiality and security data systems, breaks in any way into any system where personal and sensitive personal information is stored. SEC. 30. Concealment of Security Breaches Involving Sensitive Personal Information.  The penalty of imprisonment of one (1) year and six (6) months to five (5) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (Php1,000,000.00) shall be imposed on persons who, after having knowledge of a security breach and of the obligation to notify the Commission pursuant to Section 20(f), intentionally or by omission conceals the fact of such security breach. SEC. 31. Malicious Disclosure.  Any personal information controller or personal information processor or any of its officials, employees or agents, who, with malice or in bad faith, discloses unwarranted or false information relative to any personal information or personal sensitive information obtained by him or her, shall be subject to imprisonment ranging from one (1) year and six (6) months to five (5) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (Php1,000,000.00). SEC. 32. Unauthorized Disclosure.  (a) Any personal information controller or personal information processor or any of its officials, employees or agents, who discloses to a third party personal information not covered by the immediately preceding section without the consent of the data subject, shall he subject to imprisonment ranging from one (1) year to three (3) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (Php1,000,000.00). (b) Any personal information controller or personal information processor or any of its officials, employees or agents, who discloses to a third party sensitive personal information not covered by the immediately preceding section without the consent of the data subject, shall be subject to imprisonment ranging from three (3) years to five (5) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (Php500,000.00) but not more than Two million pesos (Php2,000,000.00). SEC. 33. Combination or Series of Acts.  Any combination or series of acts as defined in Sections 25 to 32 shall make the person subject to imprisonment ranging from three (3) years to six (6) years and a fine of not less than One million pesos (Php1,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos (Php5,000,000.00). SEC. 34. Extent of Liability.  If the offender is a corporation, partnership or any juridical person, the penalty shall be imposed upon the responsible officers, as the case may be, who participated in, or by their gross negligence, allowed the commission of the crime. If the offender is a juridical person, the court may suspend or revoke any of its rights under this Act. If the offender is an alien, he or she shall, in addition to the penalties herein prescribed, be deported without further proceedings after serving the penalties prescribed. If the offender is a public official or employee and lie or she is found guilty of acts penalized under Sections 27 and 28 of this Act, he or she shall, in addition to the penalties prescribed herein, suffer perpetual or temporary absolute disqualification from office, as the case may be. SEC. 35. Large-Scale.  The maximum penalty in the scale of penalties respectively provided for the preceding offenses shall be imposed when the personal information of at least one hundred (100) persons is harmed, affected or involved as the result of the above mentioned actions. SEC. 36. Offense Committed by Public Officer.  When the offender or the person responsible for the offense is a public officer as defined in the Administrative Code of the Philippines in the exercise of his or her duties, an accessory penalty consisting in the disqualification to occupy public office for a term double the term of criminal penalty imposed shall he applied. SEC. 37. Restitution.  Restitution for any aggrieved party shall be governed by the provisions of the New Civil Code. CHAPTER IX MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS SEC. 38. Interpretation.  Any doubt in the interpretation of any provision of this Act shall be liberally interpreted in a manner mindful of the rights and interests of the individual about whom personal information is processed. SEC. 39. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR).  Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate the rules and regulations to effectively implement the provisions of this Act. SEC. 40. Reports and Information.  The Commission shall annually report to the President and Congress on its activities in carrying out the provisions of this Act. The Commission shall undertake whatever efforts it may determine to be necessary or appropriate to inform and educate the public of data privacy, data protection and fair information rights and responsibilities. SEC. 41. Appropriations Clause.  The Commission shall be provided with an initial appropriation of Twenty million pesos (Php20,000,000.00) to be drawn from the national government. Appropriations for the succeeding years shall be included in the General Appropriations Act. It shall likewise receive Ten million pesos (Php10,000,000.00) per year for five (5) years upon implementation of this Act drawn from the national government. SEC. 42. Transitory Provision.  Existing industries, businesses and offices affected by the implementation of this Act shall be given one (1) year transitory period from the effectivity of the IRR or such other period as may be determined by the Commission, to comply with the requirements of this Act. In case that the DICT has not yet been created by the time the law takes full force and effect, the National Privacy Commission shall be attached to the Office of the President. SEC. 43. Separability Clause.  If any provision or part hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid and subsisting. SEC. 44. Repealing Clause.  The provision of Section 7 of Republic Act No. 9372, otherwise known as the Human Security Act of 2007, is hereby amended. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, all other laws, decrees, executive orders, proclamations and administrative regulations or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly. SEC. 45. Effectivity Clause.  This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation. Approved, (Sgd.) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives (Sgd.) JUAN PONCE ENRILE President of the Senate This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2965 and House Bill No. 4115 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on June 6, 2012. (Sgd.) MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP Secretary General House of Representatives (Sgd.) EMMA LIRIO-REYES Secretary of the Senate Approved: AUG 15 2012 (Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines"


"Republic Act No. 10963" -
"Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen. REPUBLIC ACT No. 10963 An Act Amending Sections 5, 6, 24, 25, 27, 31, 32, 33, 34, 51, 52, 56, 57, 58, 74, 79, 84, 86, 90, 91, 97, 99, 100, 101, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 112, 114, 116, 127, 128, 129, 145, 148, 149, 151, 155, 171, 174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 186, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 232, 236, 237, 249, 254, 264, 269, and 288; Creating New Sections 51-A, 148-A, 150-A, 150-B, 237-A, 264-A, 264-B, and 265-A; and Repealing Sections 35, 62, And 89; All Under Republic Act No. 8424, Otherwise Known as the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as Amended, and for Other Purposes Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled: Section 1. Title. - This Act shall be known as the "Tax Reform for Acceleration and Inclusion (TRAIN)". Section 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared the policy of the State: (a) To enhance the progressivity of the tax system through the rationalization of the Philippine internal revenue tax system, thereby promoting sustainable and inclusive economic growth; (b) To provide, as much as possible, an equitable relief to a greater number of taxpayers and their families in order to improve levels of disposable income and increase economic activity; and (c) To ensure that the government is able to provide for the needs of those under its jurisdiction and care through the provision of better infrastructure, health, education, jobs, and social protection for the people. Section 3. Section 5 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997 (NIRC), as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 5. Power of the Commissioner to Obtain Information, and to Summon, Examine, and Take Testimony of Persons. - In ascertaining the correctness of any return, or in making a return when none has been made, or in determining the liability of any person for any internal revenue tax, or in collecting any such liability, or in evaluating tax compliance, the Commissioner is authorized: "(A) x x x "(B) To obtain on a regular basis from any person other than the person whose internal revenue tax liability is subject to audit or investigation, or from any office or officer of the national and local governments, government agencies and instrumentalities, including the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and government-owned or -controlled corporations, any information such as, but not limited to, costs and volume of production, receipts or sales and gross incomes of taxpayers, and the names, addresses, and financial statements of corporations, mutual fund companies, insurance companies, regional operating headquarters of multinational companies, joint accounts, associations, joint ventures or consortia and registered partnerships, and their members: Provided, That the Cooperative Development Authority shall submit to the Bureau a tax incentive report, which shall include information on the income tax, value-added tax, and other tax incentives availed of by cooperatives registered and enjoying incentives under Republic Act No. 6938, as amended: Provided, further, That the information submitted by the Cooperative Development Authority to the Bureau shall be submitted to the Department of Finance and shall be included in the database created under Republic Act No. 10708, otherwise known as The Tax Incentives Management and Transparency Act (TIMTA). "x x x." Section 4. Section 6 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 6. Power of the Commissioner to Make Assessments and Prescribe Additional Requirements for Tax Administration and Enforcement - "(A) Examination of Returns and Determination of Tax Due. After a return has been filed as required under the provisions of this Code, the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative may authorize the examination of any taxpayer and the assessment of the correct amount of tax, notwithstanding any law requiring the prior authorization of any government agency or instrumentality: Provided, however, That failure to file a return shall not prevent the Commissioner from authorizing the examination of any taxpayer. "x x x "x x x "(B) x x x "(C) x x x "(D) x x x "(E) Authority of the Commissioner to Prescribe Real Property Values. The Commissioner is hereby -authorized to divide the Philippines into different zones or areas and shall, upon mandatory consultation with competent appraisers both from the private and public sectors, and with prior notice to affected taxpayers, determine the fair market value af real properties located in each zone or area, subject to automatic adjustment once every three (3) years through rules and regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance based on the current Philippine valuation standards: Provided, That no adjustment in zonal valuation shall be valid unless published in a newspaper of general circulation in the province, city or municipality concerned, or in the absence thereof, shall be posted in the provincial capitol, city or municipal hall and in two (2) other conspicuous public places therein: Provided, further, That the basis of any valuation, including the records of consultations done, shall be public records open to the inquiry of any taxpayer. For purposes of computing any internal revenue tax, the value of the property shall be, whichever is the higher of: "(1) the fair market value as determined by the Commissioner; or "(2) the fair market value as shown in the schedule of values of the Provincial and City Assessors." Section 5. Section 24 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 24. Income Tax Rates. - "(A) Rates of Income Tax on Individual Citizen and Individual, Resident Alien of the Philippines - "(1) An income tax is hereby imposed: "(a) On the taxable income defined in Section 31 of this Code, other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources within and without the Philippines by every individual citizen of the Philippines residing therein; "(b) On the taxable income defined in Section 31 of this Code, other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources within the Philippines by an individual citizen of the Philippines who is residing outside of the Philippines including overseas contract workers referred to in Subsection (C) of Section 23 hereof; and "(c) On the taxable income defined in Section 31 of this Code, other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources within the Philippines by an individual alien who is a resident of the Philippines. "(2) Rates of Tax on Taxable Income of Individuals. - The tax shall be computed in accordance with and at the rates established in the following schedule: "(a) Tax Schedule Effective January 1, 2018 until December 31, 2022: "Not over 250,000 0% "Over 250,000 but not over 400,000 20% of the excess over 250,000 "Over 400,000 but not over 800,000 30,000 + 25% of the excess over 400,000 "Over 800,000 but not over 2,000,000 130,000 + 30% of the excess over 800,000 "Over 2,000,000 but not over 5,000,000 490,000 + 32% of the excess over 2,000,000 "Over 8,000,000 2,410,000 + 35% of the excess over 8,000,000 "Tax Schedule Effective January 1, 2023 and onwards: "Not over 250,000 0% "Over 250,000 but not over 400,000 15% of the excess over 250,000 "Over 400,000 but not over 800,000 22,500 + 20% of the excess over 400,000 "Over 800,000 but not over 2,000,000 102,500 + 25% of the excess over 800,000 "Over 2,000,000 but not over 8,000,000 402,500 + 30% of the excess over 2,000,000 "Over 8,000,000 2,202,500 + 35% of the excess over 8,000,000 "For married individuals, the husband and wife, subject to the provision of Section 51(D) hereof, shall compute separately their individual income tax based on their respective total taxable income: Provided, That if any income cannot be definitely attributed to or identified as income exclusively earned or realized by either of the spouses, the same shall be divided equally between the spouses for the purpose of determining their respective taxable income. "Provided, That minimum wage earners as defined in Section 22(HH) of this Code shall be exempt from the payment of income tax on their taxable income: Provided, further, That the holiday pay, pay received by such minimum wage earners shall likewise be exempt from income tax. "(b) Rate of Tax on Income of "Purely Self-employed Individuals and/ or Professionals Whose Gross Sales or Gross Receipts and Other Non-operating Income Does Not Exceed the Value-added Tax (VAT) Threshold as Provided in Section 109(BB). Self-employed individuals and/or professionals shall have the option to avail of an eight percent (8%) tax on gross sales or gross receipts and other non-operating income in excess of Two hundred fifty thousand pesos (250,000) in lieu of the graduated income tax rates under Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section and the percentage tax under Section 116 of this Code. "(c) Rate of Tax for Mixed Income Earners. Taxpayers earning both compensation income and income from business or practice of profession shall be subject to the following taxes: "(1) All Income from Compensation  The rates prescribed under Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section. "(2) All Income from Business or Practice of Profession  "(a) If Total Gross Sales and/or Gross Receipts and Other Non-operating Income Do Not Exceed the VAT Threshold as Provided in Section 109(BB) of this Code. The rates prescribed under Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section on taxable income, or eight percent (8%) income tax based on gross sales or gross receipts and other non-operating income in lieu of the graduated income tax rates under Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section and the percentage tax under Section 116 of this Code. "(b) If Total Gross Sales and/or Gross Receipts and Other Non-operating Income Exceeds the VAT Threshold as Provided in Section 109(BB) of this Code. The rates prescribed under Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section. "(B) Rate of Tax on Certain Passive Income. "(1) Interests, Royalties, Prizes, and Other Winnings. A final tax at the rate of twenty percent (20%) is hereby imposed upon the amount of interest from any currency bank deposit and yield or any other monetary benefit from deposit substitutes and from trust funds and. similar arrangements; royalties, except on books, as well as other literary works and musical compositions, which shall be imposed a final tax of ten percent (10%); prizes (except prizes amounting to Ten thousand pesos (10,000) or less which shall be subject to tax under Subsection (A) of Section 24; and other winnings (except winnings amounting to Ten thousand pesos (10,000) or less from Philippine Charity Sweepstakes and Lotto which shall be exempt), derived from sources within the Philippines: Provided, however, That interest income received by an individual taxpayer (except a nonresident individual) from a depository bank under the expanded foreign currency deposit system shall be subject to a final income tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of such interest income: Provided, further, That interest income from long-term deposit or investment in the form of savings, common or individual trust funds, deposit substitutes, investment management accounts and other investments evidenced by certificates in such form prescribed by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Subsection: Provided, finally, That should the holder of the certificate pre-terminate the deposit or investment before the fifth (5th) year, a final tax shall be imposed on the entire income and shall be deducted and withheld by the depository bank from the proceeds of the long-term deposit or investment certificate based on the remaining maturity thereof: "x x x." "(2) Cash and/or Property Dividends. - A final tax at the rate of ten percent (10%) shall be imposed upon the cash and/or property dividends actually or constructively received by an individual from a domestic corporation or from a joint stock company, insurance or mutual fund companies and regional operating headquarters of multinational companies, or on the share of an individual in the distributable net income after tax of a partnership (except a general professional partnership) of which he is a partner, or on the share of an individual in the net income after tax of an association, a joint account, or a joint venture or consortium taxable as a corporation of which he is a member or co-venturer. "(C) Capital Gains from Sale of Shares of Stock not Traded in the Stock Exchange. - The provisions of Section 39(B) notwithstanding, a final tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) is hereby imposed upon the net capital gains realized during the taxable year from the sale, barter, exchange or other disposition of shares of stock in a domestic corporation, except shares sold, or disposed of through the stock exchange. "x x x." Section 6. Section 25 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further am.ended to read as follows: "Sec. 25. Tax on Nonresident Alien Individual - "(A) Nonresident Alien Engaged in Trade or Business Within the Philippines. - "x x x "(B) Nonresident Alien Individual Not Engaged in Trade or Business Within the Philippines. - "x x x "(C) Alien Individual Employed by Regional or Area Headquarters and Regional Operating Headquarters of Multinational Companies. - There shall be levied, collected and paid for each taxable year upon the gross income received by every alien individual employed by regional or area headquarters and regional operating headquarters established in the Philippines by multinational companies as salaries, wages, annuities, compensation, remuneration and other emoluments, such as honoraria and allowances, from such regional or area headquarters and regional operating headquarters, a tax equal to fifteen percent (15%) of such gross income: Provided, however, That the same tax treatment shall apply to Filipinos employed and occupying the same position as those of aliens employed by these multinational companies. For purposes of this Chapter, the term multinational company means a foreign firm or entity engaged in international trade with affiliates or subsidiaries or branch offices in the Asia-Pacific Region and other foreign markets. "(D) Alien Individual Employed by Offshore Banking Units. - There shall be levied, collected and paid for each taxable year upon the gross income received by every alien individual employed by offshore banking units established in the Philippines as salaries, wages, annuities, compensation, remuneration and other emoluments such as honoraria and allowances, from such offshore banking units, a tax equal to fifteen percent (15%) of such gross income: Provided, however, That the same tax treatment shall apply to Filipinos employed and occupying the same position as those of aliens employed by these offshore banking units. "(E) Alien Individual Employed by Petroleum Service Contractor and Subcontractor. - An alien individual who is a permanent resident of a foreign country but who is employed and assigned in the Philippines by a foreign service contractor or by a foreign service subcontractor engaged in petroleum operations in the Philippines shall be liable to a tax of fifteen percent (15%) of the salaries, wages, annuities, compensation, remuneration and other emoluments, such as honoraria and allowances, received from such contractor or subcontractor: Provided, however, That the same tax treatment shall apply to a Filipino employed and occupying the same position as an alien employed by petroleum service contractor and subcontractor. "Any income earned from all other sources within the Philippines by the alien employees referred to under Subsections (C), (D), and (E) hereof shall be subject to the pertinent income tax, as the case may be, imposed under this Code. "(F) The preferential tax treatment provided in Subsections (C), (D), and (E) of this Section shall not be applicable to regional headquarters (RHQs), regional operating headquarters (ROHQs), offshore banking units (OBUs) or petroleum service contractors and subcontractors registering with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) after January 1, 2018: Provided, however, That existing RHQs/ROHQs, OBUs or petroleum service contractors and subcontractors presently availing of preferential tax rates for qualified employees shall continue to be entitled to avail of the preferential tax rate for present and future qualified employees." Section 7. Section 27 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 27. Rates of Income Tax on Domestic Corporations - "(A) In General. x x x "x x x "(C) Government-owned or -Controlled Corporations, Agencies or Instrumentalities - The provisions of existing special or general laws to the contrary notwithstanding, all corporations, agencies, or instrumentalities owned or controlled by the Government, except the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), the Social Security System (SSS), the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC), and the local water districts shall pay such rate of tax upon their taxable income as are imposed by this Section upon corporations or associations engaged in similar business, industry, or activity. "(D) Rates of Tax on Certain Passive Incomes - "(1) Interest from Deposits and Yield or any other Monetary Benefit from Deposit Substitutes and from Trust Funds and Similar Arrangements, and Royalties. - A final tax at the rate of twenty percent (20%) is hereby imposed upon the amount of interest on currency bank deposit and yield or any other monetary benefit from deposit substitutes and from trust funds and similar arrangements received by domestic corporations, and royalties, derived from sources within the Philippines: Provided, however, That interest income derived by a domestic corporation from a depository bank under the expanded foreign currency deposit system shall be subject to a final income tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of such interest income. "(2) Capital Gains from the Sale of Shares of Stock Not Traded in the Stock Exchange. - A final tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) shall be imposed on net capital gains realized during the taxable year from the sale, exchange or other disposition of shares of stock in a domestic corporation except shares sold or disposed of through the stock exchange. "x x x" Section 8. Section 31 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 31. Taxable Income Defined. - The term taxable income means the pertinent items of gross income specified in this Code, less deductions, if any, authorized for such types of income by this Code or other special laws." Section 9. Section 32 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 32. Gross Income - "(A) General Definition - x x x "(B) Exclusions from Gross Income. - x x x "(1) x x x "(7) Miscellaneous Items - "(a) x x x "(e) 13th Month Pay and Other Benefits. - Gross benefits received by officials and employees of public and private entities: Provided, however, That the total exclusion under this subparagraph shall not exceed Ninety thousand pesos (90,000) which shall cover: "(i) Benefits received by officials and employees of the national and local government pursuant to Republic Act No. 6686; "(ii) Benefits received by employees pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 851, as amended by Memorandum Order No. 28, dated August 13, 1986; "(iii) Benefits received by officials and employees not covered by Presidential Decree No. 851, as amended by Memorandum Order No. 28, dated August 13,1986; and "(iv) Other benefits such as productivity incentives and Christmas bonus." Section 10. Section 33 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 33. Special Treatment of Fringe Benefit. - (a) Imposition of Tax. - Effective January 1, 2018 and onwards, a final tax of thirty-five percent (35%) is hereby imposed on the grossed-up monetary value of fringe benefit furnished or granted to the employee (except rank and file employees as defined herein) by the employer, whether an individual or a corporation (unless the fringe benefit is required by the nature of, or necessary to the trade, business or profession of the employer, or when the fringe benefit is for the convenience or advantage of the employer). The tax herein imposed is payable by the employer which tax shall be paid in the same manner as provided for under Section 57(A) of this Code. The grossed-up monetary value of the fringe benefit shall be determined by dividing the actual monetary value of the fringe benefit by sixty five percent (65%) effective January 1, 2018 and onwards: Provided, however, That fringe benefit furnished to employees and taxable under Subsections (B), (C), (D), and (E) of Section 25 shall be taxed at the applicable rates imposed thereat: Provided, further, That the grossed-up value of the fringe benefit shall be determined by dividing the actual monetary value of the fringe benefit by the difference between one hundred percent (100%) and the applicable rates of income tax under Subsections (B), (C), (D), and (E) of Section 25. "x x x." Section 11. Section 34 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 34. Deductions from Gross Income. - Except for taxpayers earning compensation income arising from personal services rendered under an employer-employee relationship where no deductions shall be allowed under this Section, in computing taxable income subject to income tax under Sections 24(A); 25(A); 26; 27(A), (B), and (C); and 28(A)(1), there shall be allowed the following deductions from gross income: "(A) Expenses. "(1) Ordinary and Necessary Trade, Business or Professional Expenses - "(a) In General - x x x "x x x "(L) Optional Standard Deduction (OSD) - In lieu of the deductions allowed under the preceding Subsections, an individual subject to tax under Section 24, other than a nonresident alien, may elect a standard deduction in an amount not exceeding forty percent (40%) of his gross sales or gross receipts, as the case may be. In the case of a corporation subject to tax under Sections 27(A) and 28(A)(l), it may elect a standard deduction in an amount not exceeding forty percent (40%) of its gross income as defined in Section 32 of this Code. Unless the taxpayer signifies in his return his intention to elect the optional standard deduction, he shall be considered as having availed himself of the deductions allowed in the preceding Subsections. Such election when made in the return shall be irrevocable for the taxable year for which the return is made: Provided, That an individual who is entitled to and claimed for the optional standard deduction shall not be required to submit with his tax return such financial statements otherwise required under this Code: Provided, further, That a general professional partnership and the partners comprising such partnership may avail of the optional standard deduction only once, either by the general professional partnership or the partners comprising the partnership: Provided, finally, That except when the Commissioner otherwise permits, the said individual shall keep such records pertaining to his gross sales or gross receipts, the said corporation shall keep such records pertaining to his gross income as defined in Section 32 of this Code during the taxable year, as may be required by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner. "Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Subsections, x x x." Section 12. Section 35 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby repealed. Section 13. Section 51 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 51. Individual Returns - "(A) x x x "(1) x x x "x x x "(2) The following individuals shall not be required to file an income tax return: "(a) An individual whose taxable income does not exceed Two hundred fifty thousand pesos (250,000) under Section 24(A)(2)(a): Provided, That a citizen of the Philippines and any alien individual engaged in business or practice of profession within the Philippines shall file an income tax return, regardless of the amount of gross income; "x x x "(5) The income tax return (ITR) shall consist of a maximum of four (4) pages in paper form or electronic form, and shall only contain the following information: "(A) Personal profile and information; "(B) Total gross sales, receipts or income from compensation for services rendered, conduct of trade or business or the exercise of a profession, except income subject to final tax as provided under this Code; "(C) Allowable deductions under this Code; "(D) Taxable income as defined in Section 31 of this Code; and "(E) Income tax due and payable. "x x x." Section 14. A new section designated as Section 51-A of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 51-A. Substituted Filing of Income Tax Returns by Employees Receiving Purely Compensation Income - Individual taxpayers receiving purely compensation income, regardless of amount, from only one employer in the Philippines for the calendar year, the income tax of which has been withheld correctly by the said employer (tax due equals tax withheld) shall not be required to file an annual income tax return. The certificate of withholding filed by the respective employers, duly stamped received by the BIR, shall be tantamount to the substituted filing of income tax returns by said employees." Section 15. Section 52 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 52. Corporation Returns - "(A) Requirements. - Every corporation subject to the tax herein imposed, except foreign corporations not engaged in trade or business in the Philippines, shall render, in duplicate, a true and accurate quarterly income tax return and final or adjustment return in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII of this Title. The income tax return shall consist of a maximum of four (4) pages in paper form or electronic form, be filed by the president, vice president or other principal officer, shall be sworn to by such officer and by the treasurer or assistant treasurer, and shall only contain the following information: "(1) Corporate profile and information; "(2) Gross sales, receipts or income from services rendered, or conduct of trade or business, except income subject to final tax as provided under this Code; "(3) Allowable deductions under this Code; "(4) Taxable income as defined in Section 31 of this Code; and "(5) Income tax due and payable. Provided, That the foregoing provisions shall not affect the implementation of Republic Act No. 10708 or TIMTA. "x x x." Section 16. Section 56 of the NIRC, as amended. is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 56. Payment and Assessment of Income Tax for Individuals and Corporations - "(A) Payment of Tax - "(1) x x - "(2) Installment of Payment. - When a tax due is in excess of Two thousand pesos (2,000), the taxpayer other than a corporation, may elect to pay the tax in two (2) equal installments, in which case, the first installment shall be paid at the time the return is filed and the second installment on or before October 15 following the close of the calendar year, if any installment is not paid on or before the date fixed for its payment, the whole amount of the tax unpaid becomes due and payable together with the delinquency penalties." Section 17. Section 57 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 57. Withholding of Tax at Source. - "(A) x x - "(B) Withholding of Creditable Tax at Source. - The Secretary of Finance may, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner, require the withholding of a tax on the items of income payable to natural or juridical persons, residing in the Philippines, by payor-corporation/persons as provided for by law, at the rate of not less than one percent (1%) but not more than thirty-two percent (32%) thereof, which shall be credited against the income tax liability of the taxpayer for the taxable year: Provided, That, beginning January 1, 2019, the rate of withholding shall not be less than one percent (1%) but not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the income payment. "(C) x x - " Section 18. Section 58 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 58. Return and Payment of Taxes Withheld at Source. - "(A) x x x "x x x "The return for final and creditable withholding taxes shall be filed and the payment made not later than the last day of the month following the close of the quarter during which withholding was made." Section 19. Section 62 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby repealed. Section 20. Section 74 of the NIRC, as amended. is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 74. Declaration of Income Tax for Individuals. - "(A) In General - Except as otherwise provided in this Section, every individual subject to income tax under Sections 24 and 25(A) of this Title, who is receiving self-employment income, whether it constitutes the sole source of his income or in combination with salaries, wages and other fixed or determinable income, shall make and file a declaration of his estimated income for the current taxable year on or before May 15 of the same taxable year. x x x "(B) Return and Payment of Estimated Income Tax by Individuals - The amount of estimated income as defined in Subsection (C) with respect to which a declaration is required under Subsection (A) shall be paid in four (4) installments. The first installment shall be paid at the time of declaration and the second and third shall be paid on August 15 and November 15 of the current year, respectively. The fourth installment shall be paid on or before May 15 of the following calendar year when the final adjusted income tax return is due to be filed. "(C) x x - " Section 21. Section 79 of the NIRC, as amended. is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 79. Income Tax Collected at Source. - "x x x "(C) Refunds or Credits. - "(1) Employer. - x x x "(2) Employees. - x x x "x x x "(D) Withholding on Basis of Average Wages. - x x x "(1) x x x "(2) x x x; and "(3) x x x. "(E) Nonresident Aliens - x x x "(F) Year-end Adjustment. - x x x." Section 22. Section 84 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 84. Rate of Estate Tax. - There shall be levied, assessed, collected and paid upon the transfer of the net estate as determined in accordance with Sections 85 and 86 of every decedent, whether resident or nonresident of the Philippines, a tax at the rate of six percent (6%) based on the value of such net estate." Section 23. Section 86 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 86. Computation of Net Estate. For the purpose of the tax imposed in this Chapter, the value of the net estate shall be determined: "(A) Deductions Allowed to the Estate of a Citizen or a Resident - In the case of a citizen or resident of the Philippines, by deducting from the value of the gross estate "(1) Standard Deduction - An amount equivalent to Five million pesos (5,000,000). "(2) For claims against the estate: Provided, That at the time the indebtedness was incurred the debt instrument was duly notarized and, if the loan was contracted within three (3) years before the death of the decedent, the administrator or executor shall submit a statement showing the disposition of the proceeds of the loan. "(3) For claims of the deceased against insolvent persons where the value of decedents interest therein is included in the value of the gross estate. "(4) For unpaid mortgages upon, or any indebtedness in respect to, property where the value of decedents interest therein, undiminished by such mortgage or indebtedness, is included in the value of the gross estate, but not including any income tax upon income received after the death of the decedent, or property taxes not accrued before his death, or any estate tax. The deduction herein allowed in the case of claims against the estate, unpaid mortgages or any indebtedness shall, when founded upon a promise or agreement, be limited to the extent that they were contracted bona fide and for an adequate and full consideration in money or moneys worth. There shall also be deducted losses incurred during the settlement of the estate arising from fires, storms, shipwreck, or other casualties, or from robbery, theft or embezzlement, when such losses are not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, and if at the time of the filing of the return such losses have not been claimed as a deduction for the income tax purposes in an income tax return, and provided that such losses were incurred not later than the last day for the payment of the estate tax as prescribed in Subsection (A) of Section 91. "(5) Property Previously Taxed. - An amount equal to the value specified below of any property forming part of the gross estate situated in the Philippines of any person who died within five (5) years prior to the death of the decedent, or transferred to the decedent by gift within five (5) years prior to his death, where such property can be identified as having been received by the decedent from the donor by gift, or from such prior decedent by gift, bequest, devise or inheritance, or which can be identified as having been acquired in exchange for property so received: "One hundred percent (100%) of the value, if the prior decedent died within one (1) year prior to the death of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift, within the same period prior to his death; "Eighty percent (80%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more than one (1) year but not more than two (2) years prior to the death of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift within the same period prior to his death; "Sixty percent (60%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more than two (2) years but not more than three (3) years prior to the death of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift within the same period prior to his death; "Forty percent (40%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more than three (3) years but not more than four (4) years prior to the death of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift within the same period prior to his death; and "Twenty percent (20%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more than four (4) years but not more than five (5) years prior to the death of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift within the same period prior to his death. "These deductions shall be allowed only where a donors tax, or estate tax imposed under this Title was finally determined and paid by or on behalf of such donor, or the estate of such prior decedent, as the case may be, and only in the amount finally determined as the value of such property in determining the value of the gift, or the gross estate of such prior decedent, and only to the extent that the value of such property is included in the decedents gross estate, and only if in determining the value of the estate of the prior decedent, no deduction was allowable under paragraph (5) in respect of the property or properties given in exchange therefor. Where a deduction was allowed of any mortgage or other lien in determining the donors tax, or the estate tax of the prior decedent, which was paid in whole or in part prior to the decedents death, then the deduction allowable under said Subsection shall be reduced by the amount so paid. Such deduction allowable shall be reduced by an amount which bears the same ratio to the amounts allowed as deductions under paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (6) of this Subsection as the amount otherwise deductible under said paragraph (5) bears to the value of the decedents estate. Where the property referred to consists of two or more items, the aggregate value of such items shall be used for the purpose of computing the deduction. "(6) Transfers for Public Use - The amount of all bequests, legacies, devises or transfers to or for the use of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, or any political subdivision thereof for exclusively public purposes. "(7) The Family Home. - An amount equivalent to the current fair market value of the decedents family home: Provided, however, That if the said current fair market value exceeds Ten million pesos (10,000,000), the excess shall be subject to estate tax. "(8) Amount Received by Heirs Under Republic Act No. 4917 - Any amount received by the heirs from the decedents employee as a consequence of the death of the decedent-employee in accordance with Republic Act No. 4917: Provided, That such amount is included in the gross estate of the decedent. "(B) Deductions Allowed to Nonresident Estates - In the case of a nonresident not a citizen of the Philippines, by deducting from the value of that part of his gross estate which at the time of his death is situated in the Philippines: "(1) Standard Deduction - An amount equivalent to Five hundred thousand pesos (500,000); "(2) That proportion of the deductions specified in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of Subsection (A) of this Section which the value of such part bears to the value of his entire gross estate wherever situated; "(3) Property Previously Taxed - x x x "(4) Transfers for Public Use - The amount of all bequests, legacies, devises or transfers to or for the use of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines or any political subdivision thereof, for exclusively public purposes. "(C) Share in the Conjugal Property - The net share of the surviving spouse in the conjugal partnership property as diminished by the obligations properly chargeable to such property shall, for the purpose of this Section, be deducted from the net estate of the decedent. "(D) Tax Credit for Estate Taxes Paid to a Foreign Country - "(1) In General - The tax imposed by this Title shall be credited with the amounts of any estate tax imposed by the authority of a foreign country. "(2) Limitations on Credit. - The amount of the credit taken under this Section shall be subject to each of the following limitations: "(a) The amount of the credit in respect to the tax paid to any country shall not exceed the same proportion of the tax against which such credit is taken, which the decedents net estate situated within such country taxable under this Title bears to his entire net estate; and "(b) The total amount of the credit shall not exceed the same proportion of the tax against which such credit is taken, which the decedents net estate situated outside the Philippines taxable under this Title bears to his entire net estate." Section 24. Section 89 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby repealed. Section 25. Section 90 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 90. Estate Tax Returns. - "(A) Requirements. - In all cases of transfers subject to the tax imposed herein, or regardless of the gross value of the estate, where the said estate consists of registered or registrable property such as real property, motor vehicle, shares of stock or other similar property for which a clearance from the Bureau of Internal Revenue is required as a condition precedent for the transfer of ownership thereof in the name of the transferee, the executor, or the administrator, or any of the legal heirs, as the case may be, shall file a return under oath in duplicate, setting forth: "(1) x x x "(2) x x x "(3) Such part of such information as may at the time be ascertainable and such supplemental data as may be necessary to establish the correct taxes. "Provided, however, That estate tax returns showing a gross value exceeding Five million pesos (5,000,000) shall be supported with a statement duly certified to by a Certified Public Accountant containing the following: "x x x "(B) Time for Filing - For the purpose of determining the estate tax provided for in Section 84 of this Code, the estate tax return required under the preceding Subsection (A) shall be filed within one (1) year from the decedents death. "x x x." Section 26. Section 91 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 91. Payment of Tax. - "(A) Time of Payment - x x x "(B) Extension of Time - x x x "x x x "(C) Payment by Installment - In case the available cash of the estate is insufficient to pay the total estate tax due, payment by installment shall be allowed within two (2) years from the statutory date for its payment without civil penalty and interest. "(D) Liability for Payment - x x x "x x x Section 27. Section 97 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 97. Payment of Tax Antecedent to the Transfer of Shares, Bonds or Rights - x x x. "If a bank has knowledge of the death of a person, who maintained a bank deposit account alone, or jointly with another, it shall allow any withdrawal from the said deposit account, subject to a final withholding tax of six percent (6%). For this purpose, all withdrawal slips shall contain a statement to the effect that all of the joint depositors are still living at the time of withdrawal by any one of the joint depositors and such statement shall be under oath by the said depositors." Section 28. Section 99 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 99. Rate of Tax Payable by Donor - "(A) In General. - The tax for each calendar year shall be six percent (6%) computed on the basis of the total gifts in excess of Two hundred fifty thousand pesos (250,000) exempt gift made during the calendar year. "(B) Any contribution in cash or in kind to any candidate, political party or coalition of parties for campaign purposes shall be governed by the Election Code, as amended." Section 29. Section 100 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 100. Transfer for Less Than Adequate and Full Consideration - Where property, other than real property referred to in Section 24(D), is transferred for less than an adequate and full consideration in money or moneys worth, then the amount by which the fair market value of the property exceeded the value of the consideration shall, for the purpose of the tax imposed by this Chapter, be deemed a gift, and shall be included in computing the amount of gifts made during the calendar year: Provided, however, That a sale, exchange, or other transfer of property made in the ordinary course of business (a transaction which is a bona fide, at arms length, and free from any donative intent), will be considered as made for an adequate and full consideration in money or moneys worth." Section 30. Section 101 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 101. Exemption of Certain Gifts - The following gifts or donations shall be exempt from the tax provided for in this Chapter: "(A) In the Case of Gifts Made by a Resident - "(1) Gifts made to or for the use of the National Government or any entity created by any of its agencies which is not conducted for profit, or to any political subdivision of the said Government; and "(2) Gifts in favor of an educational and/or charitable, religious, cultural or social welfare corporation, institution, accredited nongovernment organization, trust or philanthropic organization or research institution or organization: Provided, however, That not more than thirty percent (30%) of said gifts shall be used by such donee for administration purposes. For the purpose of this exemption, a non-profit educational and/or charitable corporation, institution, accredited nongovernment organization, trust or philanthropic organization and/or research institution or organization is a school, college or university and/or charitable corporation, accredited nongovernment organization, trust or philanthropic organization and/ or research institution or organization, incorporated as a nonstock entity, paying no dividends, governed by trustees who receive no compensation, and devoting all its income, whether students fees or gifts, donation, subsidies or other forms of philanthropy, to the accomplishment and promotion of the purposes enumerated in its Articles of Incorporation. "x x x." Section 31. Section 106 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 106. Value-added Tax on Sale of Goods or Properties - "(A) Rate and Base of Tax - There shall be levied, assessed and collected on every sale, barter or exchange of goods or properties, a value-added tax equivalent to twelve percent (12%) of the gross selling price or gross value in money of the goods or properties sold, bartered or exchanged, such tax to be paid by the seller or transferor. "(1) x x x "(2) The following sales by VAT-registered persons shall be subject to zero percent (0%) rate: "(a) Export Sales - The term export sales means: "(1) The sale and actual shipment of goods from the Philippines to a foreign country, irrespective of any shipping arrangement that may be agreed upon which may influence or determine the transfer of ownership of the goods so exported and paid for in acceptable foreign currency or its equivalent in goods or services, and accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP); "(2) Sale and delivery of goods to: "(i) Registered enterprises within a separate customs territory as provided under special laws; and "(ii) Registered enterprises within tourism enterprise zones as declared by the Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone Authority (TIEZA) subject to the provisions under Republic Act No. 9593 or The Tourism Act of 2009. "(3) Sale of raw materials or packaging materials to a nonresident buyer for delivery to a resident local export-oriented enterprise to be used in manufacturing, processing, packing or repacking in the Philippines of the said buyers goods and paid for in acceptable foreign currency and accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP); "(4) Sale of raw materials or packaging materials to export-oriented enterprise whose export sales exceed seventy percent (70%) of total annual production; "(5) Those considered export sales under Executive Order No. 226, otherwise known as the Omnibus Investment Code of 1987, and other special laws; and "(6) The sale of goods, supplies, equipment and fuel to persons engaged in international shipping or international air transport operations: Provided, That the goods, supplies, equipment and fuel shall be used for international shipping or air transport operations. "Provided, That subparagraphs (3), (4), and (5) hereof shall be subject to the twelve percent (12%) value-added tax and no longer be considered export sales subject to zero percent (0%) VAT rate upon satisfaction of the following conditions: "(1) The successful establishment and implementation of an enhanced VAT refund system that grants refunds of creditable input tax within ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund application with the Bureau: Provided, That, to determine the effectivity of item no. 1, all applications filed from January 1, 2018 shall be processed and must be decided within ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund application; and "(2) All pending VAT refund claims as of December 31, 2017 shall be fully paid in cash by December 31, 2019. "Provided, That the Department of Finance shall establish a VAT refund center in the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) and in the Bureau of Customs (BOC) that will handle the processing and granting of cash refunds of creditable input tax. "An amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of the total VAT collection of the BIR and the BOC from the immediately preceding year shall be automatically appropriated annually and shall be treated as a special account in the General Fund or as trust receipts for the purpose of funding claims for VAT refund: Provided, That any unused fund, at the end of the year shall revert to the General Fund. "Provided, further, That the BIR and the BOC shall be required to submit to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program (COCCTRP) a quarterly report of all pending claims for refund and any unused fund. "(b) Sales to persons or entities whose exemption under special laws or international agreements to which the Philippines is a signatory effectively subjects such sales to zero rate. "x x x." Section 32. Section 107 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 107. Value-added Tax on Importation of Goods. - "(A) In General. - There shall be levied, assessed and collected on every importation of goods a value-added tax equivalent to twelve percent (12%) based on the total value used by the Bureau of Customs in determining tariff and customs duties, plus customs duties, excise taxes, if any, and other charges, such tax to be paid by the importer prior to the release of such goods from customs custody: Provided, That where the customs duties are determined on the basis of the quantity or volume of the goods, the value-added tax shall be based on the landed cost plus excise taxes, if any. "(B) Transfer of Goods by Tax-exempt Persons. - x x x." Section 33. Section 108 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 108. Value-added Tax on Sale of Services and Use or Lease of Properties. "(A) Rate and Base of Tax. - There shall be levied, assessed and collected, a value-added tax equivalent to twelve percent (12%) of gross receipts derived from the sale or exchange of services, including the use or lease of properties. "The phrase sale or exchange of services means the performance of all kinds of services in the Philippines for others for a fee, remuneration or consideration, including those performed or rendered by construction and service contractors; stock, real estate, commercial, customs and immigration brokers; lessors of property, whether personal or real; warehousing services; lessors or distributors of cinematographic films; persons engaged in milling, processing, manufacturing or repacking goods for others; proprietors, operators or keepers of hotels, motels, resthouses, pension houses, inns, resorts; proprietors or operators of restaurants, refreshment parlors, cafes and other eating places, including clubs and caterers; dealers in securities; lending investors; transportation contractors on their transport of goods or cargoes, including persons who transport goods or cargoes for hire and other domestic common carriers by land relative to their transport of goods or cargoes; common carriers by air and sea relative to their transport of passengers, goods or cargoes from one place in the Philippines to another place in the Philippines; sales of electricity by generation companies, transmission by any entity, and distribution companies, including electric cooperatives; services of franchise grantees of electric utilities, telephone and telegraph, radio and television broadcasting and all other franchise grantees except those under Section 119 of this Code and non-life insurance companies (except their crop insurances), including surety, fidelity, indemnity and bonding companies; and similar services regardless of whether or not the performance thereof calls for the exercise or use of the physical or mental faculties. The phrase sale or exchange of services shall likewise include: "(1) The lease or the use of or the right or privilege to use any copyright, patent, design or model, plan, secret formula or process, goodwill, trademark, trade brand or other like property or right; "(2) The lease or the use of, or the right to use of any industrial, commercial or scientific equipment; "(3) The supply of scientific, technical industrial or commercial knowledge or information; "(4) The supply of any assistance that is ancillary and subsidiary to and is furnished as a means of enabling the application or enjoyment of any such property, or right as is mentioned in subparagraph (2) or any such knowledge or information as is mentioned in subparagraph (3); "(5) The supply of services by a nonresident person or his employee in connection with the use of property or rights belonging to, or the installation or operation of any brand, machinery or other apparatus purchased from such nonresident person; "(6) The supply of technical advice, assistance or services rendered in connection with technical management or administration of any scientific industrial or commercial undertaking, venture, projector scheme; "(7) The lease of motion picture films, -films, tapes and discs; and "(8) The lease or the use of or the right to use radio, television, satellite transmission and cable television time. "Lease of properties shall be subject to the tax herein imposed irrespective of the place where the contract of lease or licensing agreement was executed if the property is leased or used in the Philippines. "The term gross receipts means the total amount of money or its equivalent representing the contract price, compensation, service fee, rental or royalty, including the amount charged for materials supplied with the services and deposits and advanced payments actually or constructively received during the taxable quarter for the services performed or to be performed for another person, excluding value-added tax. "(B) Transactions Subject to Zero Percent (0%) Rate. - The following services performed in the Philippines by VAT registered persons shall be subject to zero percent (0%) rate: "(1) Processing, manufacturing or repacking goods for other persons doing business outside the Philippines which goods are subsequently exported, where the services are paid for in acceptable foreign currency and accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP); "(2) Services other than those mentioned in the preceding paragraph, rendered to a person engaged in business conducted outside the Philippines or to a nonresident person not engaged in business who is outside the Philippines when the services are performed, the consideration for which is paid for in acceptable foreign currency and accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP); "(3) Services rendered to persons or entities whose exemption under special laws or international agreements to which the Philippines is a signatory effectively subjects the supply of such services to zero percent (0%) rate; "(4) Services rendered to persons engaged in international shipping or international air transport operations, including leases of property for use thereof: Provided, That these services shall be exclusive for international shipping or air transport operations; "(5) Services performed by subcontractors and/or contractors in processing, converting, or manufacturing goods for an enterprise whose export sales exceed seventy percent (70%) of total annual production; "(6) Transport of passengers and cargo by domestic air or sea vessels from the Philippines to a foreign country; and "(7) Sale of power or fuel generated through renewable sources of energy such as, but not limited to, biomass, solar, wind, hydropower, geothermal, ocean energy, and other emerging energy sources using technologies such as fuel cells and hydrogen fuels. "(8) Services rendered to: "(i) Registered enterprises within a separate customs territory as provided under special law; and "(ii) Registered enterprises within tourism enterprise zones as declared by the TIEZA subject to the provisions under Republic Act No. 9593 or The Tourism Act of 2009. "Provided, That subparagraphs (B)(1) and (B)(5) hereof shall be subject to the twelve percent (12%) value-added tax and no longer be subject to zero percent (0%) VAT rate upon satisfaction of the following conditions: "(1) The successful establishment and implementation of an enhanced VAT refund system that grants refunds of creditable input tax within ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund application with the Bureau: Provided, That, to determine the effectivity of item no. 1, all applications filed from January 1, 2018 shall be processed and must be decided within ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund application; and "(2) All pending VAT refund claims as of December 31, 2017 shall be fully paid in cash by December 31, 2019. "Provided, That the Department of Finance shall establish a VAT refund center in the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) and in the Bureau of Customs (BOC) that will handle the processing and granting of cash refunds of creditable input tax. "An amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of the total value-added tax collection of the BIR and the BOC from the immediately preceding year shall be automatically appropriated annually and shall be treated as a special account in the General Fund or as trust receipts for the purpose of funding claims for VAT Refund: Provided, That any unused fund, at the end of the year shall revert to the General Fund. "Provided, further, That the BIR and the BOC shall be required to submit to the COCCTRP a quarterly report of all pending claims for refund and any unused fund." Section 34. Section 109 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 109. Exempt Transactions. - (1) Subject to the provisions of Subsection (2) hereof, the following transactions shall be exempt from the value-added tax: "(A) x x x "(B) x x x "(C) x x x "(D) Importation of professional instruments and implements, tools of trade, occupation or employment, wearing apparel, domestic animals, and personal and household effects belonging to persons coming to settle in the Philippines or Filipinos or their families and descendants who are now residents or citizens of other countries, such parties hereinafter referred to as overseas Filipinos, in quantities and of the class suitable to the profession, rank or position of the persons importing said items, for their own use and not for barter or sale, accompanying such persons, or arriving within a reasonable time: Provided, That the Bureau of Customs may, upon the production of satisfactory evidence that such persons are actually coming to settle in the Philippines and that the goods are brought from their former place of abode, exempt such goods from payment of duties and taxes: Provided, further, That vehicles, vessels, aircrafts, machineries and other similar goods for use in manufacture, shall not fall within this classification and shall therefore be subject to duties, taxes and other charges; "(E) Services subject to percentage tax under Title V; "(F) Services by agricultural contract growers and milling for others of palay into rice, corn into grits and sugar cane into raw sugar; "(G) Medical, dental, hospital and veterinary services except those rendered by professionals; "(H) Educational services rendered by private educational institutions, duly accredited by the Department of Education (DepEd), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and those rendered by government educational institutions; "(I) Services rendered by individuals pursuant to an employer-employee relationship; "(J) Services rendered by regional or area headquarters established in the Philippines by multinational corporations which act as supervisory, communications and coordinating centers for their affiliates, subsidiaries or branches in the Asia-Pacific Region and do not earn or derive income from the Philippines; "(K) Transactions which are exempt under international agreements to which the Philippines is a signatory or under special laws, except those under Presidential Decree No. 529; "(L) Sales by agricultural cooperatives duly registered with the Cooperative Development Authority to their members as well as sale of their produce, whether in its original state or processed form, to non-members; their importation of direct farm inputs, machineries and equipment, including spare parts thereof, to be used directly and exclusively in the production and/or processing of their produce; "(M) Gross receipts from lending activities by credit or multi-purpose cooperatives duly registered with the Cooperative Development Authority; "(N) Sales by non-agricultural, non-electric and non-credit cooperatives duly registered with the Cooperative Development Authority: Provided, That the share capital contribution of each member does not exceed Fifteen thousand pesos (15,000) and regardless of the aggregate capital and net surplus ratably distributed among the members; "(O) Export sales by persons who are not VAT-registered; "(P) Sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to customers or held for lease in the ordinary course of trade or business or real property utilized for low-cost and socialized housing as defined by Republic Act No. 7279, otherwise known as the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992, and other related laws, residential lot valued at One million five hundred thousand pesos (1,500,000) and below, house and lot, and other residential dwellings valued at Two million five hundred thousand pesos (2,500,000) and below: Provided, That beginning January 1, 2021, the VAT exemption shall only apply to sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to customers or held for lease in the ordinary course of trade or business, sale of real property utilized for socialized housing as defined by Republic Act No. 7279, sale of house and lot, and other residential dwellings with selling price of not more than Two million pesos (2,000,000): Provided, further, That every three (3) years thereafter, the amount herein stated shall be adjusted to its present value using the Consumer Price Index, as published by the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA); "(Q) Lease of a residential unit with a monthly rental not exceeding Fifteen thousand pesos (15,000); "(R) Sale, importation, printing or publication of books and any newspaper, magazine, review or bulletin which appears at regular intervals with fixed prices or subscription and sale and which is not devoted principally to the publication of paid advertisements; "(S) Transport of passengers by international carriers; "(T) Sale, importation or lease of passenger or cargo vessels and aircraft, including engine, equipment and spare parts thereof for domestic or international transport operations; "(U) Importation of fuel, goods and supplies by persons engaged in international shipping or air transport operations: Provided, That the fuel, goods, and supplies shall be used for international shipping or air transport operations; "(V) Services of bank, non-bank financial intermediaries performing quasi-banking functions, and other non-bank financial intermediaries; "(W) Sale or lease of goods and services to senior citizens and persons with disability, as provided under Republic Act Nos. 9994 (Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010) and 10754 (An Act Expanding the Benefits and Privileges of Persons With Disability), respectively; "(X) Transfer of property pursuant to Section 40(C)(2) of the NIRC, as amended; "(Y) Association dues, membership fees, and other assessments and charges collected by homeowners associations and condominium corporations; "(Z) Sale of gold to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP); "(AA) Sale of drugs and medicines prescribed for diabetes, high cholesterol, and hypertension beginning January 1, 2019; and "(BB) Sale or lease of goods or properties or the performance of services other than the transactions mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, the gross annual sales and/or receipts do not exceed the amount of Three million pesos (3,000,000). Section 35. Section 110 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 110. Tax Credits. - "(A) Creditable Input Tax. - "(1) x x x "(2) x x x "(a) x x x "(b) x x x "Provided, That the input tax on goods purchased or imported in a calendar month for use in trade or business for which deduction for depreciation is allowed under this Code shall be spread evenly over the month of acquisition and the fifty-nine (59) succeeding months if the aggregate acquisition cost for such goods, excluding the VAT component thereof, exceeds One million pesos (1,000,000): Provided, however, That if the estimated useful life of the capital good is less than five (5) years, as used for depreciation purposes, then the input VAT shall be spread over such a shorter period: Provided, further, That the amortization of the input VAT shall only be allowed until December 31, 2021 after which taxpayers with unutilized input VAT on capital goods purchased or imported shall be allowed to apply the same as scheduled until fully utilized: Provided, finally, That in the case of purchase of services, lease or use of properties, the input tax shall be creditable to the purchaser, lessee or licensee upon payment of the compensation, rental, royalty or fee. "x x x." Section 36. Section 112 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 112. Refunds or Tax Credits of Input Tax - "(A) x x x "(B) x x x "(C) Period within which Refund of Input Taxes shall be Made. In proper cases, the Commissioner shall grant a refund for creditable input taxes within ninety (90) days from the date of submission of the official receipts or invoices and other documents in support of the application filed in accordance with Subsections (A) and (B) hereof: Provided, That should the Commissioner find that the grant of refund is not proper, the Commissioner must state in writing the legal and factual basis for the denial. "In case of full or partial denial of the claim for tax refund, the taxpayer affected may, within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the decision denying the claim, appeal the decision with the Court of Tax Appeals: Provided, however, That failure on the part of any official, agent, or employee of the BIR to act on the application within the ninety (90)-day period shall be punishable under Section 269 of this Code. "x x x." Section 37. Section 114 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 114. Return and Payment of Value-added Tax. - "(A) In General. - Every person liable to pay the value-added tax imposed under this Title shall file a quarterly return of the amount of his gross sales or receipts within twenty-five (25) days following the close of each taxable quarter prescribed for each taxpayer: Provided, however, That VAT-registered persons shall pay the value-added tax on a monthly basis: Provided, finally, That beginning January 1, 2023, the filing and payment required under this Subsection shall be done within twenty-five (25) days following the close of each taxable quarter. "x x x "(B) x x x "(C) Withholding of Value-added Tax. - The Government or any of its political subdivisions, instrumentalities or agencies, including government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) shall, before making payment on account of each purchase of goods and services which are subject to the value-added tax imposed in Sections 106 and 108 of this Code, deduct and withhold the value-added tax imposed in Sections 106 and 108 of this Code, deduct and withhold a final value-added tax at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross payment thereof: Provided, That beginning January 1, 2021, the VAT witholding system under this Subsection shall shift from final to a creditable system: Provided, further, That the payment for lease or use of properties or property rights to nonresident owners shall be subject to twelve percent (12%) withholding tax at the time of payment: Provided, finally, That payments for purchases of goods and services arising from projects funded by Official Development Assistance (ODA) as defined under Republic Act No. 8182, otherwise known as the Official Development Assistance Act of 1996, as amended, shall not be subject to the final withholding tax system as imposed in this Subsection. For purposes of this Section, the payor or person in control of the payment shall be considered as the withholding agent. Section 38. Section 116 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 116. Tax on Persons Exempt from Value-added Tax (VAT). - Any person whose sales or receipts are exempt under Section 109(BB) of this Code from the payment of value-added tax and who is not a VAT-registered person shall pay a tax equivalent to three percent (3%) of his gross quarterly sales or receipts: Provided, That cooperatives, and beginning January 1, 2019, self-employed and professionals with total annual gross sales and/or gross receipts not exceeding Five hundred thousand pesos (500,000) shall be exempt from the three percent (3%) gross receipts tax herein imposed." Section 39. Section 127 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 127. Tax on Sale, Barter or Exchange of Shares of Stock Listed and Traded through the Local Stock Exchange or through Initial Public Offering - "(A) Tax on Sale, Barter or Exchange of Shares of Stock Listed and Traded through the Local Stock Exchange. There shall be levied, assessed and collected on every sale, barter, exchange or other disposition of shares of stock listed and traded through the local stock exchange other than the sale by a dealer in securities, a tax at the rate of six-tenths of one percent (610 of 1%) of the gross selling price or gross value in money of the shares of stock sold, bartered, exchanged or otherwise disposed which shall be paid by the seller or transferor. "x x x." Section 40. Section 128 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 128. Returns and Payment of Percentage Taxes - "(A) x x x "(1) x x x "(2) Persons Retiring from Business. x x x "(3) Determination of Correct Sales or Receipts. x x x "x x x." Section 41. Section 129, Chapter 1 of Title VI of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "TITLE VIEXCISE TAXES ON CERTAIN GOODS AND SERVICES "CHAPTER 1GENERAL PROVISIONS "Sec. 129. Goods and Services Subject to Excise Taxes. - Excise taxes apply to goods manufactured or produced in the Philippines for domestic sales or consumption or for any other disposition and to things imported as well as services performed in the Philippines. The excise tax imposed herein shall be in addition to the value-added tax imposed under Title IV. "For purposes of this Title, excise taxes herein imposed and based on weight or volume capacity or any other physical unit of measurement shall be referred to as specific tax and an excise tax herein imposed and based on selling price or other specified value of the good or service performed shall be referred to as ad valorem tax." Section 42. Section 145 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 145. Cigars and Cigarettes - "(A) Cigars. x x x "(B) Cigarettes Packed by Hand. There shall be levied, assessed and collected on cigarettes packed by hand an excise tax based on the following schedules: "Effective on January 1, 2018 until June 30, 2018, Thirty-two pesos and fifty centavos (32.50) per pack; "Effective on July 1, 2018 until December 31, 2019, Thirty-five pesos (35.00) per pack; "Effective on January 1, 2020 until December 31, 2021, Thirty-seven pesos and fifty centavos (37.50) per pack; and "Effective on January 1, 2022 until December 31, 2023, Forty pesos (40.00)per pack.1wphi1 "The rates of tax imposed under this subsection shall be increased by four percent (4%) every year effective on January 1, 2024, through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance. "Duly registered cigarettes packed by hand shall only be packed in twenties and other packaging combinations of not more than twenty. "Cigarettes packed by hand shall refer to the manner of packaging of cigarette sticks using an individual persons hands and not through any other means such as a mechanical device, machine or equipment. "(C) Cigarettes Packed by Machine.  There shall be levied, assessed and collected on cigarettes packed by machine a tax at the rates prescribed below: "Effective on January 1, 2018 until June 30, 2018, the tax on all cigarettes packed by machine shall be Thirty-two pesos and fifty centavos (32.50) per pack; "Effective on July 1, 2018 until December 31, 2019, the tax on all cigarettes packed by machine shall be Thirty-five pesos (35.00) per pack; "Effective on January 1, 2020 until December 31, 2021, the tax on all cigarettes packed by machine shall be Thirty-seven pesos and fifty centavos (37.50) per pack; and "Effective on January 1, 2022 until December 31, 2023, the tax on all cigarettes packed by machine shall be Forty pesos (40.00) per pack. "The rates of tax imposed under this Subsection shall be increased by four percent (4%) every year thereafter effective on January 1, 2024, through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance." Section 43. Section 148 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 148. Manufactured Oils and Other Fuels. - There shall be collected on refined and manufactured mineral oils and motor fuels, the following excise taxes which shall attach to the goods hereunder enumerated as soon as they are in existence as such: "Effective January 1, 2018 "(a) Lubricating oils and greases, including but not limited to, basestock for lube oils and greases, high vacuum distillates, aromatic extracts and other similar preparations, and additives for lubricating oils and greases, whether such additives are petroleum based or not, per liter and kilogram, respectively, of volume capacity or weight, Eight pesos (8.00): Provided, That lubricating oils and greases produced from basestocks and additives on which the excise tax has already been paid shall no longer be subject to excise tax: Provided, further, That locally produced or imported oils previously taxed as such but are subsequently reprocessed, refined or recycled shall likewise be subject to the tax imposed under this Subsection; "(b) Processed gas, per liter of volume capacity, Eight pesos (8.00); "(c) Waxes and petrolatum, per kilogram, Eight pesos (8.00); "(d) On denatured alcohol to be used for motive power, per liter of volume capacity, Eight pesos (8.00): Provided, That unless otherwise provided by special laws, if the denatured alcohol is mixed with gasoline, the excise tax on which has already been paid, only the alcohol content shall be subject to the tax herein prescribed. For purposes of this Subsection, the removal of denatured alcohol of not less than one hundred eighty degrees (180) proof (ninety percent (90%) absolute alcohol) shall be deemed to have been removed for motive power, unless shown otherwise; "(e) Naphtha, regular gasoline, pyrolysis gasoline and other similar products of distillation, per liter of volume capacity, Seven pesos (7.00): Provided, however, That naphtha and pyrolysis gasoline, when used as a raw material in the production of petrochemical products, or in the refining of petroleum products, or as replacement fuel for natural-gas-fired-combined cycle power plant in lieu of locally-extracted natural gas during the non-availability thereof, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, per liter of volume capacity, zero (0.00): Provided, further, That the production of petroleum products, whether or not they are classified as products of distillation and for use solely for the production of gasoline shall be exempt from excise tax: Provided, finally, That the by-product including fuel oil, diesel fuel, kerosene, pyrolysis gasoline, liquefied petroleum gases and similar oils having more or less the same generating power, which are produced in the processing of naphtha into petrochemical products shall be subject to the applicable excise tax specified in this Section, except when such by-products are transferred to any of the local oil refineries through sale, barter or exchange, for the purpose of further processing or blending into finished products which are subject to excise tax under this Section; "(f) Unleaded premium gasoline, per liter of volume capacity, Seven pesos (7.00); "(g) Aviation turbo jet fuel, aviation gas, per liter of volume capacity, Four pesos (4.00); "(h) Kerosene, per liter of volume capacity, Three pesos (3.00): Provided, That kerosene, when used as aviation fuel, shall be subject to the same tax on aviation turbo jet fuel under the preceding paragraph (g), such tax to be assessed on the user thereof; "(i) Diesel fuel oil, and on similar fuel oils having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, Two pesos and fifty centavos (2.50); "(j) Liquefied petroleum gas, per kilogram, One peso (1.00): Provided, That liquefied petroleum gas when used as raw material in the production of petrochemical products, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, shall be taxed zero (0.00) per kilogram: "Provided, finally, That liquefied petroleum gas used for motive power shall be taxed at the equivalent rate as the excise tax on diesel fuel oil; "(k) Asphalts, per kilogram, Eight pesos (8.00); "(l) Bunker fuel oil, and on similar fuel oils having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, Two pesos and fifty centavos (2.50): Provided, however, That the excise taxes paid on the purchased basestock (bunker) used in the manufacture of excisable articles and forming part thereof shall be credited against the excise tax due therefrom; and "(m) Petroleum coke, per metric ton, Two pesos and fifty centavos.(2.50): Provided, however, That, petroleum coke, when used as feedstock to any power generating facility, per metric ton, zero (0.00). "Effective January 1, 2019 "(a) Lubricating oils and greases, including but not limited to, basestock for lube oils and greases, high vacuum distillates, aromatic extracts and other similar preparations, and additives for lubricating oils and greases, whether such additives are petroleum based or not, per liter and kilogram, respectively, of volume capacity or weight, Nine pesos (9.00): Provided, That lubricating oils and greases produced from basestocks and additives on which the excise tax has already been paid shall no longer be subject to excise tax: Provided, further, That locally produced or imported oils previously taxed as such but are subsequently reprocessed, rerefined or recycled shall likewise be subject to the tax imposed under this Subsection. "(b) Processed gas, per liter of volume capacity, Nine pesos (9.00); "(c) Waxes and petrolatum, per kilogram, Nine pesos (9.00); "(d) On denatured alcohol to be used for motive power, per liter of volume capacity, Nine pesos (9.00): Provided, That unless otherwise provided by special laws, if the denatured alcohol is mixed with gasoline, the excise tax on which has already been paid, only the alcohol content shall be subject to the tax herein prescribed. For purposes of this Subsection, the removal of denatured alcohol of not less than one hundred eighty degrees (180) proof (ninety percent (90%) absolute alcohol) shall be deemed to have been removed for motive power, unless shown otherwise; "(e) Naphtha, regular gasoline, pyrolysis gasoline, and other similar products of distillation, per liter of volume capacity, Nine pesos (9.00): Provided, however, That naphtha and pyrolysis gasoline, when used as a raw material in the production of petrochemical products, or in the refining of petroleum products, or as replacement fuel for natural-gas-fired-combined cyclepower plant in lieu of locally-extracted natural gas during the non-availability thereof, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, per liter of volume capacity, zero (0.00): Provided, further, That the production of petroleum products, whether or not they are classified as products of distillation and for use solely for the production of gasoline shall be exempt from excise tax: Provided, finally, That the by-product including fuel oil, diesel fuel, kerosene, pyrolysis gasoline, liquefied petroleum, gases and similar oils having more or less the same generating power, which are produced in the processing of naphtha into petrochemical products shall be subject to the applicable excise tax specified in this Section, except when such by-products are transferred to any of the local oil refineries through sale, barter or exchange, for the purpose of further processing or blending into finished products which are subject to excise tax under this Section; "(f) Unleaded premium gasoline, per liter of volume capacity, Nine pesos (9.00); "(g) Aviation turbo jet fuel, aviation gas, per liter of volume capacity, Four pesos (4.00); "(h) Kerosene, per liter of volume capacity, Four pesos (4.00): Provided, That kerosene, when used as aviation fuel, shall be subject to the same tax on aviation turbo jet fuel under the preceding paragraph (g), such tax to be assessed on the user thereof; "(i) Diesel fuel oil, and on similar fuel oils having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, Four pesos and fifty centavos (4.50); "(j) Liquefied petroleum gas, per kilogram, Two pesos(2.00): Provided, That liquefied petroleum gas when used as raw material in the production of petrochemical products, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, per kilogram, zero (0.00): Provided, finally, That liquefied petroleum gas used for motive power shall be taxed at the equivalent rate as the excise tax on diesel fuel oil; "(k) Asphalts, per kilogram, Nine pesos (9.00); "(l) Bunker fuel oil, and on similar fuel oils having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, Four pesos and fifty centavos (4.50): Provided, however, That the excise taxes paid on the purchased basestock (bunker) used in the manufacture of excisable articles and forming part thereof shall be credited against the excise tax due therefrom; and "(m) Petroleum coke, per metric ton, Four pesos and fifty centavos (4.50): Provided, however, That, petroleum coke, when used as feedstock to any power generating facility, per metric ton, zero (0.00). "Effective January 1, 2020 "(a) Lubricating oils and greases, including but not limited to, basestock for lube oils and greases, high vacuum distillates, aromatic extracts and other similar preparations, and additives for lubricating oils and greases, whether such additives are petroleum based or not, per liter and kilogram, respectively, of volume capacity or weight, Ten pesos (10.00): Provided, That lubricating oils and greases produced from basestocks and additives on which the excise tax has already been paid shall no longer be subject to excise tax: Provided, further, That locally produced or imported oils previously taxed as such but are subsequently reprocessed, rerefined or recycled shall likewise be subject to the tax imposed under this Subsection. "(b) Processed gas, per liter of volume capacity, Ten pesos (10.00); "(c) Waxes and petrolatum, per kilogram, Ten pesos (10.00); "(d) On denatured alcohol to be used for motive power, per liter of volume capacity, Ten pesos (10.00): Provided, That unless otherwise provided by special laws, if the denatured alcohol is mixed with gasoline, the excise tax on which has already been paid, only the alcohol content shall be subject to the tax herein prescribed. For purposes of this Subsection, the removal of denatured alcohol of not less than one hundred eighty degrees (180) proof (ninety percent (90%) absolute alcohol) shall be deemed to have been removed for motive power, unless shown otherwise; "(e) Naphtha, regular gasoline, pyrolysis gasoline and other similar products of distillation, per liter of volume capacity, Ten pesos (10.00): Provided, however, That naphtha and pyrolysis gasoline, when used as a raw material in the production of petrochemical products, or in the refining of petroleum products or as replacement fuel for natural-gas-fired-combined cycle power plant in lieu of locally-extracted natural gas during the non-availability thereof, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, per liter of volume capacity, zero (0.00): Provided, further, That the production of petroleum products, whether or not they are classified as products of distillation and for use solely for the production of gasoline shall be exempt from excise tax: Provided, finally, That the by-product including fuel oil, diesel fuel, kerosene, pyrolysis gasoline, liquefied petroleum gases and similar oils having more or less the same generating power, which are produced in the processing of naphtha into petrochemical products shall be subject to the applicable excise tax specified in this Section, except when such by-products are transferred to any of the local oil refineries through sale, barter or exchange, for the purpose of further processing or blending into finished products which are subject to excise tax under this Section; "(f) Unleaded premium gasoline, per liter of volume capacity, Ten pesos (10.00); "(g) Aviation turbojet fuel, aviation gas, per liter of volume capacity, Four pesos (4.00); "(h) Kerosene, per liter of volume capacity, Five pesos (5.00): Provided, That kerosene, when used as aviation fuel, shall be subject to the same tax on aviation turbo jet fuel under the preceding paragraph (g), such tax to be assessed on the user thereof; "(i) Diesel fuel oil, and on similar fuel oils having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, Six pesos (6.00); "(j) Liquefied petroleum gas, per kilogram, Three pesos (3.00): Provided, That liquefied petroleum gas when used as raw material in the production of petrochemical products, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, per kilogram, zero (0.00): Provided, finally, That liquefied petroleum gas used for motive power shall be taxed at the equivalent rate as the excise tax on diesel fuel oil; "(k) Asphalts, per kilogram, Ten pesos (10.00); "(l) Bunker fuel oil, and on similar fuel oils having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, Six pesos (6.00): Provided, however, That the excise taxes paid on the purchased basestock (bunker) used in the manufacture of excisable articles and forming part thereof shall be credited against the excise tax due therefrom; and "(m) Petroleum coke, per metric ton, Six pesos (6.00): Provided, however, That, petroleum coke, when used as feedstock to any power generating facility, per metric ton, zero (0.00). "Petroleum products, including naphtha, LPG, petroleum coke, refinery fuel and other products of distillation, when used as input, feedstock or as raw material in the manufacturing of petrochemical products, or in the refining of petroleum products, or as replacement fuel for natural-gas-fired-combined cyclepower plant in lieu of locally-extracted natural gas during the non-availability thereof, subject to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, per liter of volume capacity, zero (0.00): Provided, That the by-product including fuel oil, diesel fuel, kerosene, pyrolysis gasoline, liquefied petroleum gases, and similar oils having more or less the same generating power, which are produced in the processing of naphtha into petrochemical products shall be subject to the applicable excise tax specified in this Section, except when such by-products are transferred to any of the local oil refineries through sale, barter or exchange, for the purpose of further processing or blending into finished products which are subject to excise tax under this Section. "For the period covering 2018 to 2020, the scheduled increase in the excise tax on fuel as imposed in this Section shall be suspended when the average Dubai crude oil price based on Mean of Platts Singapore (MOPS)for three (3) months prior to the scheduled increase of the month reaches or exceeds Eighty dollars (USD 80) per barrel. "Provided, That the Department of Finance shall perform an annual review of the implementation of the excise tax on fuel and shall, based on projections provided and recommendations of the Development Budget Coordination Committee, as reconciled from the conditions as provided above, recommend the implementation or suspension of the excise tax on fuel: Provided, further, That the recommendation shall be given on a yearly basis: Provided, finally, That any suspension of the increase in excise tax shall not result in any reduction of the excise tax being imposed at the time of the suspension." Section 44. A new section designated as Section 148-A under Chapter V of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 148-A. Mandatory Marking of All Petroleum Products. - In accordance with rules and regulations to be issued by the Secretary of Finance, in consultation with the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and Commissioner of Customs and in coordination with the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Finance shall require the use of an official fuel marking or similar technology on petroleum products that are refined, manufactured, or imported into the Philippines, and that are subject to the payment of taxes and duties, such as but not limited to, unleaded premium gasoline, kerosene, and diesel fuel oil after the taxes and duties thereon have been paid. The mandatory marking of all petroleum products shall be in accordance with the following: "(a) Official Markers. - There shall be a list of chemical additives and corresponding quantitative ratio as identified by the Secretary of Finance as official fuel markers. The official fuel markers shall be .distinct and, to the greatest degree possible, impossible to imitate or replicate: Provided, That the official fuel marker must be unique to the Philippines and that its chemical composition and quantitative ratio must persist for at least three (3) years from their application or administration to the unmarked fuel; "(b) The person, entity, or taxpayer who owns or enters the petroleum products into the country, or the person to whom the petroleum products are consigned shall cause and accommodate the marking of the petroleum products with the official marking agent; "(c) Internal revenue or customs officers shall be on site to administer the declaration of the tax and duties imposed on the petroleum products and to oversee the application of the fuel marking; "(d) Absence of Official or Dilution of the Official Marker; Presumptions. In the event that the petroleum products which do not contain the official marker or which contain the official marker but are diluted beyond the acceptable percentage approved by the Secretary of Finance are found in the domestic market or in the possession of anyone, or under any situation where said petroleum products are subject to duties and taxes, it shall be presumed that the same were withdrawn with the intention to evade the payment of the taxes and duties due thereon; "(e) The use of fraudulent marker on the petroleum products shall be considered prima facie evidence that the same have been withdrawn or imported without the payment of taxes and duties due thereon; "(f) Engagement of Fuel Marking Provider. The government shall engage only one fuel marking provider who shall, under the supervision and direction of the Commissioners of Internal Revenue and Customs, be responsible for providing, monitoring, and administering the fuel markers, provide equipment and devices, conduct field and confirmatory tests, and perform such other acts incidental or necessary to the proper implementation of the provisions of this Act: Provided, That the fuel marking provider shall provide an end-to-end solution to the Government, including the establishment and operation of testing facilities that are certified to ISO 17025; "(g) All costs pertaining to the procurement of the official fuel markers shall be borne by the refiner, manufacturer or importer, of petroleum products, as the case may be: Provided, That the government may subsidize the cost of official fuel markers in the first year of implementation; "(h) Fuel Marking Program Funds. - In addition to any appropriation to implement this Section and the last paragraph of Section 171 of this Act, fees or charges collected in relation to the fuel marking program may be recorded as trust receipts of the implementing agencies, and shall be exclusively disbursed to defray the cost of services or equipment required to fully implement the said program, subject to rules and regulations to be issued by the DOF-DBM-COA permanent committee; "(i) The marking of petroleum products shall be mandatory within five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act; and "(j) The term random field test shall refer to periodic random inspections and tests performed to establish qualitative and quantitative positive result of fuel trafficking, which are conducted on fuels found in warehouses, storage tanks, gas stations and other retail outlets, and in such other properties or equipment, including mechanisms of transportation, of persons engaged in the sale, delivery, trading, transportation, distribution, or importation of fuel intended for domestic market. "The term confirmatory tests shall refer to the accurate and precise analytical test of the tested unmarked, adulterated, or diluted fuel using a device, tool or equipment which will validate and confirm the result of the field test, that is immediately conducted in an accredited testing facility that is certified to ISO 17025." Section 45. Section 149, Chapter 6 of Title VI of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "CHAPTER VI  EXCISE TAX ON MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES "Sec. 149. Automobiles. - There shall be levied, assessed and collected an ad valorem tax on automobiles based on the manufacturers or importers selling price, net of excise and value-added tax, in accordance with the following schedule: "Effective January 1, 2018 "Net manufacturers price/importers selling price Rate "Up to Six hundred thousand pesos (600,000) Four percent (4%) "Over Six hundred thousand pesos (600,000) to One million pesos (1,000,000) Ten percent (10%) "Over One million pesos (1,000,000) to Four million pesos (4,000,000) Twenty percent(20%) "Over Four million pesos (4,000,000) Fifty percent (50%) "Provided, That hybrid vehicles shall be subject to fifty percent (50%) of the applicable excise tax rates on automobiles under this Section: Provided, further, That purely electric vehicles and pick-ups shall be exempt from excise tax on automobiles. "As used in this Section "(a) Automobile shall mean any four (4) or more wheeled motor vehicle regardless of seating capacity, which is propelled by gasoline, diesel, electricity or any other motive power: Provided, That for purposes of this Act, buses, trucks, cargo vans, jeepneys/jeepney substitutes, single cab chassis, and special-purpose vehicles shall not be considered as automobiles. "(b) Truck/cargo van shall mean a motor vehicle of any configuration that is exclusively designed for the carriage of goods and with any number of wheels and axles: Provided, That pick-ups shall be considered as trucks. "(c) Jeepney/jeepney substitutes shall mean as Philippine jeep or jeepney which are of the jitney type Jocally designed and manufactured generally from surplus parts and components. It shall also include jeepney substitutes that are manufactured from brand-new single cab chassis or cowl chassis and locally customized rear body that has continuous sideway row seats with open rear door and without retractable glass windows. "(d) Bus shall mean a motor vehicle of any configuration with gross vehicle weight of 4.0 tons or more with any number of wheels and axles, which is generally accepted and specially designed for or public transportation. "(e) Single cab chassis shall mean a motor vehicle with complete engine power train and chassis equipped with a cab that has a maximum of two (2) doors and only one (1) row of seats. "(f) Special purpose vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle designed for specific applications such as cement mixer, fire truck, boom truck, ambulance and/or medical unit, and off-road vehicles for heavy industries and not for recreational activities. "(g) Hybrid electric vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle powered by electric energy, with or without provision for off-vehicle charging, in combination with gasoline, diesel or any other motive power: Provided, That, for purposes of this Act, a hybrid electric vehicle must be able to propel itself from a stationary condition using solely electric motor. "Provided, That in the case of imported automobiles not for sale, the tax imposed herein shall be based on the total landed value, including transaction value, customs duty and all other charges. "Automobiles used exclusively within the freeoort zone shall be exempt from. excise tax." Section 46. A new section designated as Section 150-A under Chapter VI, Title VI of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 150-A. Non-essential Services. There shall be levied, assessed, and collect a tax equivalent to five percent (5%) based on the gross receipts derived from the performance of services, net of excise tax and value-added tax, on invasive cosmetic procedures, surgeries, and body enhancements directed solely towards improving, altering, or enhancing the patients appearance and do not meaning fully promote the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness or disease: Provided, That this tax shall not apply to procedures necessary to ameliorate a deformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital or developmental defect or abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or trauma, or disfiguring disease, tumor, virus or infection: Provided, further, That cases or treatments covered by the National Health Insurance Program shall not be subject to this tax." Section 47. A new section designated as Section 150-B under Chapter VI, Title VI of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 150-B. Sweetened Beverages - "(A) Rate and Base of Tax. - Effective January 1, 2018: "(1) A tax of Six pesos (6.00) per liter of volume capacity shall be levied, assessed, and collected on sweetened beverages using purely caloric sweeteners, and purely non-caloric sweeteners, or a mix of caloric and non-caloric sweeteners: Provided, That this tax rate shall not apply to sweetened beverages using high fructose corn syrup: Provided, further, That sweetened beverages using purely coconut sap sugar and purely steviol glycosides shall be exempt from this tax; and "(2) A tax of Twelve pesos (12.00) per liter of volume capacity shall be levied, assessed, and collected on sweetened beverages using purely high fructose corn syrup or in combination with any caloric or non-caloric sweetener. "(B) Definition of Terms. - As used in this Act: "(1) Sweetened beverages (SBs) refer to non-alcoholic beverages of any constitution (liquid, powder, or concentrates) that are pre-packaged and sealed in accordance with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) standards, that contain caloric and/or non-caloric sweeteners added by the manufacturers, and shall include, but not be limited to the following, as described in the Food Category System from Codex Alimentarius Food Category Descriptors (Codex Stan 192-1995, Rev. 2017 or the latest) as adopted by the FDA: "(a) Sweetened juice drinks; "(b) Sweetened tea; "(c) All carbonated beverages; "(d) Flavored water; "(e) Energy and sports drinks; "(f) Other powdered drinks not classified as milk, juice, tea, and coffee; "(g) Cereal and grain beverages; and "(h) Other non-alcoholic beverages that contain added sugar. "(2) Caloric sweetener refers to a substance that is sweet and includes sucrose, fructose, and glucose that produces a certain sweetness; "(3) High fructose corn syrup refers to a sweet saccharide mixture containing fructose and glucose which is derived from corn and added to provide sweetness to beverages, and which includes other similar fructose syrup preparations; and "(4) Non-caloric sweetener refers to a substance that are artificially or chemically processed that produces a certain sweetness. These are substances which can be directly added to beverages, such as aspartame, sucralose, saccharin, acesulfame, potassium, neotame, cyclamates and other non-nutritive sweeteners approved by the Codex Alimentarius and adopted by the FDA. "(C) Exclusions. - The following products, as described in the food category system from Codex Alimentarius Food Category Descriptors (Codex Stan 192-1995, Rev. 2017 or the latest) as adopted by the FDA, are excluded from the scope of this Act: "(1) All milk products, including plain milk, infant formula milk, follow-on milk, growing up milk, powdered milk, ready-to-drink milk and flavored milk, fermented milk, soymilk, and flavored soymilk; "(2) One Hundred Percent (100%) Natural Fruit Juices - Original liquid resulting from the pressing of fruit, the liquid resulting from the reconstitution of natural fruit juice concentrate, or the liquid resulting from the restoration of water to dehydrated natural fruit juice that do not have added sugar or caloric sweetener; "(3) One Hundred Percent (100%) Natural Vegetable Juices - Original liquid resulting from the pressing of vegetables, the liquid resulting from the reconstitution of natural vegetable juice concentrate, or the liquid resulting from the restoration of water to dehydrated natural vegetable juice that do not have added sugar or caloric sweetener; "(4) Meal Replacement and Medically Indicated Beverages - Any liquid or powder drink/product for oral nutritional therapy for persons who cannot absorb or metabolize dietary nutrients from food or beverages, or as a source of necessary nutrition used due to a medical condition and an oral electrolyte solution for infants and children formulated to prevent dehydration due to illness; and "(5) Ground coffee, instant soluble coffee, and pre-packaged powdered coffee products. "(D) Filing of Return and Payment of Excise Tax and Penalty - "(1) Filing of Return and Payment of Excise Tax on Domestic and Imported Sweetened Beverages. - The provision of Sections 130 and 131 of the NIRC, as appropriate, shall apply to sweetened beverages. "(2) Penalty. - Upon final findings by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and/or Customs that any manufacturer or importer, in violation of this Section, misdeclares or misrepresents in the sworn statement provided in Section 130(c) of the NIRC, as amended, any pertinent data or information, the penalty of summary cancellation or withdrawal of the permit to engage in business as manufacturer or importer of sweetened beverages as provided under Section 268 of the NIRC, as amended, shall be imposed. "Any corporation, association or partnership liable for any of the acts or omissions in violation of this Section shall be fined treble the amount of deficiency taxes, surcharges, and interest which may be assessed pursuant to this Section. "Any person liable for any of the acts or omissions prohibited under this Section. shall be crirninal1y liable and penalized under Section 254 of the NIRC, as amended. Any person who willfully aids or abets in the commission of any such act or omission shall be criminally liable in the same manner as the principal. "If not a citizen of the Philippines, the offender shall be deported immediately after serving the sentence without further proceedings for deportation. "(E) Specific Responsibility of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). - Starting June 1, 2018, the FDA shall require all manufacturers and importers of sweetened beverages covered by this Act to indicate on the label the type of sweetener used, and on sweetened beverages in powder form to indicate on the label the equivalent of each serving per liter of volume capacity. "The FDA shall also conduct post marketing surveillance of the sweetened beverages on display in supermarkets, groceries or retail stores and/or inspection of manufacturing sites to determine compliance with the requirements of this Section. Violations of the provisions of this Act, including but not limited to, mislabeling or misbranding, shall, to the extent applicable, be punishable under existing laws. "(F) Duty of the Commissioner to Ensure Payment of Taxes. - It shall be the duty of the Commissioner, among other things, to prescribe a materially unique, secure and non removable identification, such as codes, stamps or other markings, to be firmly and conspicuously affixed on and form part of the label of all excisable sweetened beverages. "For this purpose, the above mentioned control measure shall be caused by the Commissioner to be printed with adequate security features to ensure the payment of excise tax on sweetened beverages. "(G) Review of Implementation of the Sweetened Beverage Tax. - At the start of the implementation of the sugar sweetened beverage tax and every year thereafter, the Department of Health, Department of Science and Technology, and Department of Finance shall review the impact of these provisions on its health objectives with the view to making recommendations on the tax rate on these beverages." Section 48. Section 151 of the NIRC, as amended,is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 151. Mineral Products - "(A) Rates of Tax. - There shall be levied, assessed and collected on minerals, mineral products and quarry resources, excise tax as follows: "(1) On domestic or imported coal and coke, notwithstanding any incentives granted in any law or special law: "Effective January 1, 2018, Fifty pesos (50.00) per metric ton; "Effective January 1, 2019, One hundred pesos (100.00) per metric ton; and "Effective January 1, 2020, One hundred fifty pesos {150.00) per metric ton. "(2) On all nonmetallic minerals and quarry resources, a tax of four percent (4%) based on the actual market value of the gross output thereof at the time of removal, in the case of those locally extracted or produced; or the value used by the Bureau of Customs in determining tariff and customs duties, net of excise tax and value-added tax in the case of importation. "x x x: "(a) Copper and other metallic minerals, four percent (4%); and "(b) Gold and chromite, four percent (4%). "(4) On indigenous petroleum, a tax of six percent (6%) of the fair international market price thereof, on the first taxable sale, barter, exchange or such similar transaction, such tax to be paid by the buyer or purchaser before removal from the place of production. x x x. "x x x." Section 49. Section 155 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 155. Manufacturers and/or Importers to Provide Themselves with Counting or Metering Devices to Determine Volume of Production and Importation. - Manufacturers of cigarettes, alcoholic products, oil products, and other articles subject to excise tax that can be similarly measured shall provide themselves with such necessary number of suitable counting or metering devices to determine as accurately as possible the volume, quantity or number of the articles produced by them under rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner: Provided, That the Department of Finance shall maintain a registry of all petroleum manufacturers and/or importers and the articles being manufactured and/or imported by them: Provided, further, That the Department of Finance shall mandate the creation of a real-time inventory of petroleum articles being manufactured, imported or found in storage depots of such petroleum manufacturers and/or importers: Provided, finally, That importers of finished petroleum products shall also provide themselves with Bureau-accredited metering devices to determine as accurately as possible the volume of petroleum products imported by them. This requirement shall be complied with before commencement of operations." Section 50. Section 171 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 171. Authority of Internal Revenue Officer in Searching for and Testing Taxable Articles. - Any internal revenue officer may, in the discharge of his official duties, enter any house, building or place where articles subject to tax under this Title are produced or kept, or are believed by him upon reasonable grounds to be produced or kept, so far as may be necessary to examine, test, discover or seize the same. "He may also stop and search any vehicle or other means of transportation when upon reasonable grounds he believes that the same carries any article on which the excise tax has not been paid. "Subject to rules and regulations to be issued by the Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue or his authorized representatives may conduct periodic random field tests and confirmatory tests on fuel required to be marked under Section 148-A found in warehouses, storage tanks, gas stations and other retail outlets, and in such other properties of persons engaged in the sale, delivery, trading, transportation, distribution, or importation of fuel intended for the domestic market: Provided, "(a) Random field testing shall be conducted in the presence of revenue or customs officers, fuel marking provider, and the authorized representative of the owner of the fuel to be tested: Provided, That an employee assigned or working at the place where the random field tests conducted shall be deemed an authorized representative of the owner; "(b) All field tests shall be properly filmed or video taped, and documented; and "(c) A sample of the randomly tested fuel shall be immediately obtained by the revenue or customs officer upon discovering that the same unmarked, adulterated, or diluted: "Provided, further, That confirmatory fuel test certificates issued by fuel testing facilities shall be valid for any legal purpose from the date of issue, and shall constitute admissible and conclusive evidence before any court." Section 51. Section 174 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 174. Stamp Tax on Original Issue of Shares of Stock. - On every original issue, whether on organization, reorganization or for any lawful purpose, of shares of stock by any association, company, or corporation; there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Two pesos (2.00) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the par value, of such shares of stock: Provided, That in the case of the original issue of shares of stock without par value, the amount of the documentary stamp tax herein prescribed shall be based upon the actual consideration for the issuance of such shares of stock: Provided, further, That in the case of stock dividends, on the actual value represented by each share." Section 52. Section 175 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 175. Stamp Tax on Sales, Agreements to Sell, Memoranda of Sales, Deliveries or Transfer of Shares or Certificates of Stock - On all sales, or agreements to sell, or memoranda of sales, or deliveries, or transfer of shares or certificates of stock in any association, company, or corporation, or transfer of such securities by assignment in blank, or by delivery, or by any paper or agreement, or memorandum or other evidences of transfer or sale whether entitling the holder in any manner to the benefit of such stock, or to secure the future payment of money, or for the future transfer of any stock, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of One peso and fifty centavos (1.50) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the par value of such stock: Provided, That only one tax shall be collected on each sale or transfer of stock from one person to another, regardless of whether or not a certificate of stock is issued, indorsed, or delivered in pursuance of such sale or transfer: and Provided, further, That in the case of stock without par value the amount of the documentary stamp tax herein prescribed shall be equivalent to fifty percent (50%) of the documentary stamp tax paid upon the original issue of said stock." Section 53. Section 177 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 177. Stamp Tax on Certificates of Profits or Interest in Property or Accumulations. - On all certificates of profits, or any certificate or memorandum showing interest in the property or accumulations of any association, company or corporation, and on all transfers of such certificates or memoranda, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of One peso (1.00) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the face value of such certificates or memorandum." Section 54. Section 178 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 178. Stamp Tax on Bank Checks, Drafts, Certificates of Deposit not Bearing Interest, and Other Instruments. - On each bank check, draft, or certificate of deposit not drawing interest, or order for the payment of any sum of money drawn upon or issued by any bank, trust company, for any person or persons, companies or corporations, at sight or on demand there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Three pesos (3.00)." Section 55. Section 179 of the NIRC, as amended. is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 179. Stamp Tax on All Debt Instruments. - On every original issue of debt instruments, there shall be collected a documentary stamp-tax of One peso and fifty centavos (1.50) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the issue price of any such debt instruments: Provided, That for such debt instruments with terms of less than one (1) year, the documentary stamp tax to be collected shall be of a proportional amount in accordance with the ratio of its term in number of days to three hundred sixty-five (365) days: Provided, further, That only one documentary stamp tax shall be imposed on either loan agreement, or promissory notes issued to secure such loan. "x x x." Section 56. Section 180 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 180. Stamp Tax on All Bills of Exchange or Drafts. - On all bills of exchange (between points within the Philippines) or drafts, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Sixty centavos (0.60) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the face value of any such bill of exchange or draft." Section 57. Section 181 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 180. Stamp Tax Upon Acceptance of Bills of Exchange and Others. - Upon any acceptance or payment of any bill of exchange or order for the payment of money purporting to be drawn in a foreign country but payable in the Philippines, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Sixty centavos (0.60) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the face value of any such bill of exchange, or order, or the Philippine equivalent of such value, if expressed in foreign currency." Section 58. Section 182 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 182. Stamp Tax on Foreign Bills of Exchange and Letters of Credit. - On all foreign bills of exchange and letter of credit (including orders, by telegraph or otherwise, for the payment of money issued by express or steamship companies or by any person or persons) drawn in but payable out of the Philippines in a set of three (3) or more according to the custom of merchants and bankers, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Sixty centavos (0.60) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the face value of any such bill of exchange or letter of credit, or the Philippine equivalent of such face value, if expressed in foreign Section 59. Section 183 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 183. Stamp Tax on Life Insurance Policies. On all policies of insurance or other instruments by whatever name the same may be called, whereby any insurance shall be made or renewed upon any life or lives, there shall be collected a one-time documentary stamp tax at the following rates: "If the amount of insurance does not exceed 100,000 Exempt "If the amount of Insurance exceeds 100,000 but does not exceed 300,000 20.00 "If the amount of insurance exceeds 300,000 but does not exceed 500,000 50.00 "If the amount of insurance exceeds 500,000 but does not exceed 750,000 100.00 "If the amount of insurance exceeds 750,000 but does not exceed 1,000,000 150.00 "If the amount of insurance exceeds 1,000,000 200.00" Section 60. Section 186 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 186. Stamp Tax on Policies ofAnnuities and Pre-Need Plans. - On all policies of annuities, or other instruments by whatever name the same may be called, whereby an annuity may be made, transferred or redeemed, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of One peso (1.00) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof, of the premium or installment payment on contract price collected. On pre-need plans, the documentary stamp tax shall be Forty centavos (0.40) on each Two hundred pesos (200), or fractional part thereof of the premium or contribution collected." Section 61. Section 188 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 188. Stamp Tax on Certificates. - On each certificate of damage or otherwise, and on every other certificate or document issued by any customs officer, marine surveyor, or other person acting as such, and on each certificate issued by a notary public, and on each certificate of any description required by law or by rules or regulations of a public office, or which is issued for the purpose of giving information, or establishing proof of a fact, and not otherwise specified herein, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Thirty pesos (30.00)." Section 62. Section 189 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 189. Stamp Tax on Warehouse Receipts. - On each warehouse receipt for property held in storage in a public or private warehouse or yard for any person other than the proprietor of such warehouse or yard, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Thirty pesos (30.00): Provided, That no tax shall be collected on each warehouse receipt issued to any one person in any one calendar month covering property the value of which does not exceed Two hundred pesos (200)." Section 63. Section 190 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 190. Stamp Tax on Jai-alai, Horse Race, Tickets, Lotto or Other Authorized Numbers Games. - On each jai-alai, horse race ticket, lotto, or other authorized numbers games, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Twenty centavos (0.20): Provided, That if the cost of the ticket exceed One peso (1.00), an additional tax of Twenty centavos (0.20) on every One peso (1.00), or fractional part thereof, shall be collected." Section 64. Section 191 of the same Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 191. Stamp Tax on Bills of Lading or Receipts. - On each set of bills of lading or receipts (except charter party) for any goods, merchandise or effects shipped from one port or place in the Philippines (except on ferries across rivers), or to any foreign port, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Two pesos (2.00), if the value of such goods exceeds One hundred pesos (100) and does not exceed One thousand pesos (1,000); Twenty pesos (20.00), if the value exceeds One thousand pesos (1,000): Provided, however, That freight tickets covering goods, merchandise or effects carried as accompanied baggage of passengers on land and water carriers primarily engaged in the transportation of passengers are hereby exempt." Section 65. Section 192 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 192. Stamp Tax on Proms. - On each proxy for voting at any election of officers of any company or association, or for any other purpose, except proxies issued affecting the affairs of associations or corporations organized for religious, charitable or literary purposes, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Thirty pesos (30.00)." Section 66. Section 193 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 193. Stamp Tax on Powers of Attorney. - On each power of attorney to perform any act whatsoever, except acts connected with the collection of claims due from or accruing to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, or the government of any province, city or municipality, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Ten pesos (10.00)." Section 67. Section 194 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 194. Stamp Tax on Leases and Other Hiring Agreements. - On each lease, agreement, memorandum, or contract for hire, use or rent of any lands or tenements, or portions thereof, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax of Six pesos (6.00) for the first Two thousand pesos (2,000), or fractional part thereof, and an additional Two pesos (2.00) for every One thousand pesos (1,000) or fractional part thereof, in excess of the first Two thousand pesos (2,000) for each year of the term of said contract or agreement." Section 68. Section 195 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 195. Stamp Tax on Mortgages, Pledges and Deeds of Trust. - On every mortgage or pledge of lands, estate, or property, real or personal, heritable or movable, whatsoever, where the same shall be made as a security for the payment of any definite and certain sum of money lent at the time or previously due and owing or forborne to be paid, being payable, and on any conveyance of land, estate, or property whatsoever, in trust or to be sold, or otherwise converted into money which shall be and intended only as security, either by express stipulation or otherwise, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax at the following rates: "(a) When the amount secured does not exceed Five thousand pesos (5,000), Forty pesos (40.00). "(b) On each Five thousand pesos (5,000), or fractional part thereof in excess of Five thousand pesos (5,000), an additional tax of Twenty pesos (20.00). "x x x." Section 69. Section 196 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 196. Stamp Tax on Deeds of Sale, Conveyances and Donation of Real Property. - On all conveyances, donations, deeds, instruments, or writings, other than grants, patents or original certificates of adjudication issued by the Government, whereby any land, tenement, or other realty sold shall be granted, assigned, transferred, donated or otherwise conveyed to the purchaser, or purchasers, or to any other person or persons designated by such purchaser or purchasers, or donee, there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax, at the rates herein below prescribed, based on the consideration contracted to be paid for such realty or on its fair market value determined in accordance with Section 6(E) of this Code, whichever is higher: Provided, That when one of the contracting parties is the Government, the tax herein imposed shall be based on the actual consideration: "(a) When the consideration, or value received or contracted to be paid for such realty, after making proper allowance of any encumbrance, does not exceed One thousand pesos (1,000), Fifteen pesos (15.00). "(b) For each additional One thousand pesos (1,000), or fractional part thereof in excess of One thousand pesos (1,000) of such consideration or value, Fifteen pesos (15.00). "Transfers exempt from donors tax under Section 101(a) and (b) of this Code shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. "When it appears that the amount of the documentary stamp tax payable hereunder has been reduced by an incorrect statement of the consideration in any conveyance, deed, instrument or writing subject to such tax the Commissioner, provincial or city Treasurer, or other revenue officer shall. from the assessment rolls or other reliable source of information, assess the property of its true market value and collect the proper tax thereon." Section 70. Section 197 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 197. Stamp Tax on Charter Parties and Similar Instruments. - On every charter party, contract or agreement for the charter of any ship, vessel or streamer, or any letter or memorandum or other writing between the captain, master or owner or other person acting as agent of any ship, vessel or steamer, and any other person or persons for relating to the charter of any such ship, vessel or streamer, and on any renewal or transfer of such charter, contract, agreement, letter or memorandum there shall be collected a documentary stamp tax the following rates: "(a) If the registered gross tonnage of the ship, vessel or steamer does not exceed one thousand (1,000) tons, and the duration of the charter or contract does not exceed six (6) months, One thousand pesos (1,000); and for each month or fraction of a month in excess of six (6) months, an additional tax of One hundred pesos (100) shall be paid. "(b) If the registered gross tonnage exceeds one thousand (1,000) tons and does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) tons, and the duration of the charter or contract does not exceed six (6) months, Two thousand pesos (2,000); and for each month or fraction of a month in excess of six (6) months, an additional tax of Two hundred pesos (200) shall be paid. "(c) If the registered gross tonnage exceeds ten thousand (10,000) tons and the duration of the charter or contract does not exceed six (6) months, Three thousand pesos (3,000); and for each month or fraction of a month in excess of six (6) months, an additional tax of Three hundred pesos (300) shall be paid." Section 71. Section 232 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 232. Keeping of Books of Accounts. "(A) Corporations, Companies, Partnerships or Persons Required to Keep Books of Accounts. All corporations, companies, partnerships or persons required by law to pay internal revenue taxes shall keep and use relevant and appropriate set of bookkeeping records duly authorized by the Secretary of Finance wherein all transactions and results of operations are shown and from which all taxes due the Government may readily and accurately be ascertained and determined any time of the year: Provided, That corporations, companies, partnerships or persons whose gross annual sales, earnings, receipts or output exceed Three million pesos (3,000,000), shall have their books of accounts audited and examined yearly by independent Certified Public Accountants and their income tax returns accompanied with a duly accomplished Account Information Form (AIF) which shall contain, among others, information lifted from certified balance sheets, profit and loss statements, schedules listing income-producing properties and the corresponding income therefrom and other relevant statements. "x x x." Section 72. Section 236 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 236. Registration Requirements - "(A) Requirements. - x x x "x x x "The registration shall contain the taxpayers name, style, place of residence, business, and such other information as may be required by the Commissioner in the form prescribed therefor: Provided, That the Commissioner shall simplify the business registration and tax compliance requirements of self-employed individuals and/or professionals. "x x x "(G) Persons Required to Register for Value-Added Tax - "(1) x x x "(a) His gross sales or receipts for the past twelve (12) months, other than those that are exempt under Section 109(A) to (BB), have exceeded Three million pesos (3,000,000); or "(b) There are reasonable grounds to believe that his gross sales or receipts for the next twelve (12) months, other than those that are exempt under Section 109(A) to (BB), will exceed Three million pesos (3,000,000). "x x x "(H) Optional Registration for Value-Added Tax of Exempt Person. - (1) Any person who is not required to register for value-added tax under Subsection (G) hereof may elect to register for value-added tax by registering with the Revenue District Office that has jurisdiction over the head office of that person, and paying the annual registration fee in Subsection (B) hereof. "(2) Any person who elects to register under this Subsection shall not be entitled to cancel his registration under Subsection (F)(2) for the next three (3) years. "Provided, That any person taxed under Section 24(A)(2)(b) and 24(A)(2)(c)(2)(a) of the NIRC who elected to pay the eight percent (8%) tax on gross sales or receipts shall not be allowed to avail of this option. "For purposes of Title IV of this Code, any person who has registered value-added tax as a tax type in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (C) hereof shall be referred to as a VAT-registered person who shall be assigned only one Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). "x x x." Section 73. Section 237 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 237. Issuance of Receipts or Sales or Commercial Invoices. "(A) Issuance. - All persons subject to an internal revenue tax shall, at the point of each sale and transfer of merchandise or for services rendered valued at One hundred pesos (100) or more, issue duly registered receipts or sale or commercial invoices, showing the date of transaction, quantity, unit cost and description of merchandise or nature of service: Provided, however, That where the receipt is issued to cover payment made as rentals, commissions, compensation or fees, receipts or invoices shall be issued which shall show the name, business style, if any, and address of the purchaser, customer or client: Provided, further, That where the purchaser is a VAT-registered person, in addition to the information herein required, the invoice or receipt shall further show the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) of the purchaser. "Within five (5)years from the effectivity of this Act and upon the establishment of a system capable of storing and processing the required data. the Bureau shall require taxpayers engaged in the export of goods and services, taxpayers engaged in e-commerce, and taxpayers under the jurisdiction of the Large Taxpayers Service to issue electronic receipts or sales or commercial invoices in lieu of manual receipts or sales or commercial invoices subject to rules and regulations to be issued by th; Secretary of Finance upon recommendation of the Commissioner and after a public hearing shall have been held for this purpose: Provided, That taxpayers not covered by the mandate of this provision may issue electronic receipts or, sales or commercial invoices, in lieu of manual receipts, and sales and commercial invoices. "The original of each receipt or invoice shall be issued to the purchaser, customer or client at the time the transaction is effected, who, if engaged in business or in the exercise of profession, shall keep and preserve the same in his place of business for a period of three (3) years from the close of the taxable year in which such invoice or receipt was issued, while the duplicate shall be kept and preserved by the issuer, also in his place of business, for a like period: Provided, That in case of electronic receipts or sales or commercial invoices, the digital records of the same shall be kept by the purchaser, customer or client and the issuer for the same period above stated. "The Commissioner may, in meritorious cases, exempt any person subject to internal revenue tax from compliance with the provisions of this Section." Section 74. A new section designated as Section 237-A under Chapter II, Title IX of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 237-A. Electronic Sales Reporting System. Within five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act and upon the establishment of a system capable of storing and processing the required data, the Bureau shall require taxpayers engaged in the export of goods and services, and taxpayers under the jurisdiction of the Large Taxpayers Service to electronically report their sales data to the Bureau through the use of electronic point of sales systems, subject to rules and regulations to be issued by the Secretary of Finance as recommended by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue: Provided, That the machines, fiscal devices, and fiscal memory devices shall be at the expense of the taxpayers. "The data processing of sales and purchase data shall comply with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the "Data Privacy Act" and Section 270 of the NIRC, as amended, on unlawful divulgence of taxpayer information and such other laws relating to the confidentiality of information. "The Bureau shall also establish policies, risk management approaches, actions, trainings, and technologies to protect the cyber environment, organization, and data in compliance with Republic Act No. 10175 or the "Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012." Section 75. Section 249 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 249. Interest - "(A) In General. - There shall be assessed and collected on any unpaid amount of tax, interest at the rate of double the legal interest rate for loans or forbearance of any money in the absence of an express stipulation as set by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas from the date prescribed for payment until the amount is fully paid: Provided, That in no case shall the deficiency and the delinquency interest prescribed under Subsections (B) and (C) hereof, be imposed simultaneously. "(B) Deficiency Interest - Any deficiency in the tax due, as the term is defined in this Code, shall be subject to the interest prescribed in Subsection (A) hereof, which interest shall be assessed and collected from the date prescribed for its payment until the full payment thereof, or upon issuance of a notice and demand by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, whichever comes earlier. "(C) Delinquency Interest. - x x x "x x x." Section 76. Section 254 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 254. Attempt to Evade or Defeat Tax. - Any person who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax imposed under this Code or the payment thereof shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, upon conviction thereof, be punished with a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (500,000) but not more than Ten million pesos (10,000,000), and imprisonment of not less than six (6) years but not more than ten (10) years: Provided, That the conviction or acquittal obtained under this Section shall not be a bar to the filing of a civil suit for the collection of taxes." Section 77. Section 264 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 264. Failure or Refusal to Issue Receipts or Sales or Commercial Invoices, Violations Related to the Printing of such Receipts or Invoices and Other Violations - "(a) x x x "(b) Any person who commits any of the acts enumerated hereunder shall be penalized with a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (500,000) but not more than Ten million pesos (10,000,000), and imprisonment of not less than six (6) years but not more than ten (10) years: "(1) x x x; "(2) x x x; "(3) x x x; or "(4) Printing of other fraudulent receipts or sales or commercial invoices." Section 78. A new section designated as Section 264-A under Chapter II, Title X of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted as follows: "Sec. 264-A. Failure to Transmit Sales Data Entered on Cash Register Machine (CRM)/Point of Sales System (POS) Machines to the BIRs Electronic Sales Reporting System. - Any taxpayer required to transmit sales data to the Bureaus electronic sales reporting system but fails to do so, shall pay, for each day of violation, a penalty amounting to one-tenth of one percent (110 of 1%) of the annual net income as reflected in the taxpayers audited financial statement for the second year preceding the current taxable year for each day of violation or Ten thousand pesos (10,000), whichever is higher: Provided, That should the aggregate number of days of violation exceed one hundred eighty (180) days within a taxable year, an additional penalty of permanent closure of the taxpayer shall be imposed: Provided, further, That if the failure to transmit is due to force majeure or any causes beyond the control of the taxpayer the penalty shall not apply." Section 79. A new section designated as Section 264-B under Chapter II, Title X of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 264-B. Purchase, Use, Possession, Sale or Offer to Sell, Installment, Transfer, Update, Upgrade, Keeping or Maintaining of Sales Suppression Devices. Any person who shall purchase, use, possess, sell or offer to sell, install, transfer, update, upgrade, keep, or maintain any software or device designed for, or is capable of: (a) suppressing the creation of electronic records of sale transactions that a taxpayer is required to keep under existing tax laws and/or regulations; or (b) modifying, hiding, or deleting electronic records of sales transactions and providing a ready means of access to them, shall be punished by a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (500,000) but not more than Ten million pesos (10,000,000), and suffer imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more than four (4) years: Provided, That a cumulative suppression of electronic sales record in excess of the amount of Fifty million pesos (50,000,000) shall be considered as economic sabotage and shall be punished in the maximum penalty provided for under this provision." Section 80. A new section designated as Section 265-A under Chapter II, Title X of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows: "Sec. 265-A. Offenses Relating to Fuel Marking. All offenses relating to fuel marking shall, in addition to the penalties imposed under Title X of the NIRC, as amended, Section 1401 of Republic Act No. 10863, otherwise known as the Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA),and other relevant laws, be punishable as follows: "(a) Any person who is found to be engaged in the sale, trade, delivery, distribution or transportation of unmarked fuel in commercial quantity held for domestic use or merchandise shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalties of: "(1) For the first offense, a fine of Two million five hundred thousand pesos (2,500,000); "(2) For the second offense, a fine of Five million pesos (5,000,000); and "(3) For the third offense,a fine of Ten million pesos (10,000,000)and revocation of license to engage in any trade or business. "(b) Any person who causes the removal of the official fuel marking agent from marked fuel, and the adulteration or dilution of fuel intended for sale to the domestic market, or the knowing possession, storage, transfer or offer for sale of fuel obtained as a result of such removal, adulteration or dilution shall be penalized in the same manner and extent as provided for in the preceding Subsection. "(c) Any person who commits any of the acts enumerated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than One million pesos (1,000,000) but not more than Five million pesos (5,000,000), and suffer imprisonment of not less than four (4) years but not more than eight (8) years: "(1) Making, importing, selling, using or possessing fuel markers without express authority; "(2) Making, importing, selling, using or possessing counterfeit fuel markers; "(3) Causing another person or entity to commit any of the two (2) preceding acts; or "(4) Causing the sale, distribution, supply or transport of legitimately imported, in-transit, manufactured or procured controlled precursors and essential chemicals, in diluted, mixtures or in concentrated form, to any person or entity penalized in Subsections (a), (b), or (c) hereof, including but not limited to, packaging, repackaging, labeling, relabeling or concealment of such transaction through fraud, destruction of documents, fraudulent use of permits, misdeclaration, use of front companies or mail fraud. "(d) Any person who willfully inserts, places, adds or attaches directly or indirectly, through any overt or covert. act, whatever quantity of any unmarked fuel, counterfeit additive or chemical in the person, house, effects, inventory, or in the immediate vicinity of an innocent individual for the purpose of implicating, incriminating or imputing the commission of any violation of this Act shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than Five million pesos (5,000,000) but not more than Ten million pesos (10,000,000), and suffer imprisonment of not less than four (4) years but not more than eight (8) years. "(e) Any person who is authorized, licensed or accredited under this Act and its implementing rules to conduct fuel tests, who issues false or fraudulent fuel test results knowingly, willfully or through gross negligence, shall suffer the additional penalty of imprisonment ranging from one (1) year and one (1) day to two (2) years and six (6) months. "The additional penalties of revocation of the license to practice his profession in case of a practitioner, and the closure of the fuel testing facility, may also be imposed at the instance of the court." Section 81. Section 269 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 269. Violations Committed by Government Enforcement Officers. - x x x "(a) x x x; "x x x "(h) Having knowledge or information of any violation of this Code or of any fraud committed on the revenues collectible by the Bureau of Internal Revenue, failure to report such knowledge or information to then superior officer, or failure to report as otherwise required by law; "(i) x x x; and "(j) Deliberate failure to act on the application for refunds within the prescribed period provided under Section 112 of this Act. "Provided, That the provisions of the foregoing paragraph notwithstanding, any internal revenue officer for which a prima facie case of grave misconduct has been established shall, after due notice and hearing of the administrative case and subject to Civil Service Laws, be dismissed from the revenue service: Provided, further, That the term grave misconduct, as defined in the Civil Service Law, shall include the issuance of fake letters of authority and receipts, forgery of signature, usurpation of authority and habitual issuance of unreasonable assessments. Section 82. Section 288 of the NIRC, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: "Sec. 288. Disposition of Incremental Revenue - "(A) x x x "(B) x x x "(C) x x x "(D) x x x "(E) x x x "(F) Incremental Revenues from the Tax Reform for Acceleration and Inclusion (TRAIN). - For five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act, the yearly incremental revenues generated shall be automatically appropriated as follows: "(1) Not more than-seventy percent (70%) to fund infrastructure projects such as, but not limited to, the Build, Build, Build Program and provide infrastructure programs to address congestion through mass transport and new road networks military infrastructure, sports facilities for public schools, and potable drinking water supply in all public places; and "(2) Not more than thirty percent (30%) to fund: "(a) Programs under Republic Act No. 10659 otherwise known as Sugarcane Industry Development Act of 2015, to advance the self-reliance of sugar farmers that will increase productivity, provide livelihood opportunities, develop alternative farming systems and ultimately enhance farmers income; "(b) Social mitigating measures and investments in: (i) education, (ii) health, targeted nutrition, and anti-hunger programs for mothers infants, and young children, (iii) social protection, (iv) employment, and (v) housing that prioritize and directly benefit both the poor and near-poor households; "(c) A social welfare and benefits program where qualified beneficiaries shall be provided with a social benefits card to avail of the following social benefits: "(i) Unconditional cash transfer to households in the first to seventh income deciles of the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR), Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, and the social pension program for a period of three (3) years from the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That the unconditional cash transfer shall be Two hundred pesos (200.00) per month for the first year and Three hundred pesos (300.00) per month for the second year and third-year, to be implemented by the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD); "(ii) Fuel vouchers to qualified franchise holders of Public Utility Jeepneys (PUJs); "(iii)For minimum wage earners, unemployed, and the poorest fifty percent (50%) of the population: "(1) Fare discount from all public utility vehicles (except trucks for hire and school transport service) in the amount equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the authorized fare; "(2) Discounted purchase of National Food Authority (NFA) rice from accredited retail stores in the amount equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the net retail prices, up to a maximum of twenty (20) kilos per month; and "(3) Free skills training under a program implemented by the Technical Skills and Development Authority (TESDA). "Provided, That benefits or grants contained in this Subsection shall not be availed in addition to any other discounts. "(iv) Other social benefits programs to be developed and implemented by the government. "Notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary, the incremental revenues from the tobacco taxes under this Act shall be subject to Section 3 of Republic Act No. 7171, otherwise known as An Act to Promote the Development of the Farmer in the Virginia Tobacco Producing Provinces, and Section 8 of Republic Act No. 8240, otherwise known as An Act Amending Sections 138, 139, 140 and 142 of the National Internal Revenue Code, as Amended, and for Other Purposes. "An interagency committee, chaired by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and co-chaired by DOF and DSWD, and comprised of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), Department of Transportation (DOTr), Department of Education (DepEd), Department of Health (DOH), Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), National Housing Authority (NHA), Sugar Regulatory Administration (SRA), Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), Department of Energy (DOE), NFA, and TESDA, is hereby created to oversee the identification of qualified beneficiaries and the implementation of these projects and programs: Provided, That qualified beneficiaries under Subsection (c) hereof shall be identified using the National ID System which may be enacted by Congress. "Within sixty (60) days from the end of the three (3)-year period from the effectivity of this Act, the interagency committee and respective implementing agencies for the above programs shall submit corresponding program assessments to the COCCTRP. The National Expenditure Program from 2019 onwards shall provide line items that correspond to the allocations mandated in the provisions above. "At the end of five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act, all earmarking provisions under Subsection (F), shall cease to exist and all incremental revenues derived under this Act shall accrue to the General Fund of the government." Section 83. Reportorial Requirements. - The interagency committee created and the concerned departments/agencies/beneficiaries under Section 82 of this Act shall submit to the President of the Senate of the Philippines, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Senate Committee on Finance and the House Committee on Appropriations a detailed report on the expenditure of the amounts earmarked hereon copy furnished the Chairpersons of the Committee on Ways and Means of both Houses of Congress. The report shall likewise be posted on the official website of the agencies concerned. Section 84. Implementing Rules and Regulations. - Within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary of Finance shall. upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for its effective implementation. Section 85. Separability Clause. - If any provision of this Act is subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions hereof which are n~t affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect. Section 86. Repealing Clause. - The following laws or provisions of laws are hereby repealed and the persons and/or transactions affected herein are made subject to the VAT provision of Title IV of the NIRC, as amended: (a) Section 3 of Presidential Decree (P.D.). 1972, s. 1985, as amended, Sections 4 and 5 of Executive Order No. (E.O.) 1057, s. 1985, and Section 4 of E.O. 1064, s. 1985, insofar as the VAT tax exemption and tax credit is concerned; (b) Section 10, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of Republic Act No. (R.A.) 6807 or An Act Converting the Mati Community College into a State College to be known as the Davao Oriental State College of Science and Technology, Providing for a Charter for this Purpose, Expanding its Curricular Offerings, Redirecting its Objectives, and Appropriating Funds Therefor; (c) Sections 18 and 19, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 6847 or The Philippine Sports Commission Act; (d) Section 8(d), last paragraph, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7278 or An Act Amending Commonwealth Act No. 111, as Amended by P.D. 460, entitled An Act to Create a Public Corporation to be Known as the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, and to Define its Powers and Purposes, by Strengthening the Volunteer and Democratic Character of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines and for Other Purposes; (e) Section 1, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7291 or An Act Restoring the Tax and Duty Incentives Previously Enjoyed by the Veterans Federation of the Philippines under Republic Act Numbered Twenty-Six Hundred and Forty; (f) Section 21, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7306 or the Charter of the Peoples Television Network, Inc.; (g) Section 14, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7354 or the Postal Service Act of 1992; (h) Section 9(c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7355 or the Manlilikha ng Bayan Act; (i) Section 21, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned. of RA 7366 or the Law Creating the National Commission for Culture and the Arts; (j) Section 7(f), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7371 or An Act Converting the Aklan Agricultural College into Ak1an State College of Agriculture, and Appropriating Funds Therefor; (k) Section 12, second sentence, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7373 or An Act Establishing the Eastern Visayas Science High School; (l) Section 11(j), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7605 or the Charter of the Philippine State College of Aeronautics; (m) Section 126, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7653 or The New Central Bank Act; (n) Section 14, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7875 or the National Health Insurance Act of 1995; (o) Section 18, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, and Section 18, last paragraph of R.A. 7884 or the National Dairy Development Act of 1995; (p) Section 8, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, R.A. 8160 or An Act Granting the University of the Philippines a Franchise to Construct, Install, Operate and Maintain for Educational and Other Related Purposes, Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations Within the University of the Philippines and in Such Other Areas Within the Scope of its Operation; (q) Sections 2 and 16, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 8282 or The Social Security Act of 1997; (r) Section 39, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 8291 or The Government Service Insurance System Act of 1997; (s) Section 4(c) and (f), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 8292 or the Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997; (t) Section 25, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 8492 or the National Museum Act of 1998; (u) Section 3(h), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 8502 or the Jewelry Industry Development Act of 1998; (v) Article 65, insofar as VAT exemption and zero rating is concerned, of regional or area headquarters and zero-rating of the sale or lease of goods and property and the rendition of services to regional or area headquarters, and Article 67, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 8756; Provided, That existing RHQs and ROHQs enjoying VAT exemption and zero-rating at the time of the effectivity of TRAIN shall not be affected; (w) Section 7(c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 9045 or An Act Creating the Batangas State University; (x) Section 7(c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 9055 or An Act Converting the A1tlan State College of Agriculture into the Aldan State University; (y) Section 13, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned of R.A. 9083 or An Act Establishing the Sta. Rosa Science and Technology High School in Sta. Rosa Laguna; (z) Section 7(c) and (f), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of RA 9138 or An Act Establishing the Guimaras State College; (aa) Section 7(c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 9141 or An Act Converting the Negros Occidental Agricultural College into State College to be known as the Negros Occidental Agricultural College; (bb) Section 16, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 9497 or The Civil Aviation Authority Act of 2008; (cc) Section 25(b) and (c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, and (d), insofar as VAT zero rating is concerned, of R.A. 9500 or the University of the Philippines Charter of 2008; (dd) Section 25(b) and (c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, and (d) insofar as VAT zero-rating is concerned, of R.A. 9519 or An Act Converting Mindanao Polytechnic State College into a State University to be Known as the Mindanao University of Science and Technology; (ee) Section 17(c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 3591, otherwise known as the PDIC Charter, as amended by Section 8 of R.A. 9576, otherwise known as An Act Increasing the Maximum Deposit Insurance Coverage, and in Connection Therewith, to Strengthen the Regulatory and Administrative Authority, and Financial Capability of the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC), Amending for this Purpose Republic Act Numbered Three Thousand Five Hundred Ninety-One, as Amended, Otherwise Known as the PDIC Charter, and for Other Purposes; (ff) Sections 2 and 19, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 9679 or An Act Further Strengthening the Home Development Mutual Fund, and for Other Purposes; (gg) Section 23, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned of the National Historical Commission of the Philippines, of R.A. 10086, or the Strengthening Peoples Nationalism Through Philippine History Act; (hh) Section 7(b) and (c), insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, and (d), insofar as VAT zero-rating is concerned, of R.A. 9647 or the Philippine Normal University Modernization Act of 2009; (ii) Section 17, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 7898, as amended by R.A. 10349, Establishing the Revised AFP Modernization Program and for Other Purposes; (jj) Section 56, insofar as VAT exemption is concerned, of R.A. 10801 or the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration Act; (kk) Section 9(e)(2) and (j), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 7900 or the High-Value Crops Development Act of 1995; (ll) Section 24(e) of R.A. 10068 or the Organic Agriculture Act of 2010; (mm) Section 14(b), with respect to VAT, R.A. 7308 or the Seed Industry Development Act of 1992; (nn) Section 35 (b)(c), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 8550 or The Philippine Fisheries Code of 1998; (oo) Section 13, second paragraph, with respect to VAT, of R.A. 10817 or the Philippine Halal Export Development and Promotion Act of 2016; (pp) Section 9(3), (4), and (8), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 8479 or the Downstream Oil Industry Deregulation Act of 1998; (qq) Section 6(c) and (d), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 7103 or the Iron and Steel Industry Act; (rr) Section 10, with respect to VAT, of R.A. 7718 or An Act Amending R.A. No. 6957; (ss) Section 26(B)(3), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 9275 or the Philippine Clean Water Act of 2004; (tt) Section 20(d)(3) of R.A. 7279 or the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992; (uu) Section 20(d)(3) of R.A. 10884 or An Act Strengthening the Balanced Housing Development Program, Amending for the Purpose RA 7279, as Amended, Otherwise Known as the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992; (vv) Section 14, with respect to VAT, of R.A. 8423 or the Traditional and Alternative Medicine Act (TAMA) of 1997; (ww) Section 22(b) of R.A. 10747 or the Rare Diseases of the Philippines; (xx) Section 45(a), (b), and (c), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 9003 or the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000; (yy) Section 5(b), with respect to VAT, of R.A. 10771 or the Philippine Green Jobs Act of 2016; (zz) Section 6, with respect to VAT, of R.A. 7459 or the Investors and Inventions Incentives Act of the Philippines; (aaa) Section 24, insofar as VAT exemption of foundations for scientific advancements is concerned, of R.A. 2067, as amended, or the Science Act of 1958; and (bbb) Section 9, with respect to VAT, of R.A. 9511 or the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines Act. Provided, That the VAT obligations of government owned and-controlled corporations, state universities and colleges, and other government instrumentalities whose VAT exemption has been repealed under this Act shall be chargeable to the Tax Expenditure Fund (TEF) provided for in the annual General Appropriations Act: Provided, further, That VAT exemption, VAT zero-rating, and VAT credit granted to state universities and colleges on their purchases and importations are hereby repealed and the transactions affected herein are made subject to the VAT provisions of Title IV of the NIRC, as amended. Provided, That, with respect to income tax, the following laws or provisions of laws are hereby repealed or amended: (a) Section 33(A) of R.A. 7277, as amended by R.A. 10754 or the Magna Carta for Persons with Disability; (b) Section 22(B) of R.A. 10165 or the Foster Care Act of 2012; (c) Section 4 of R.A. 1169 or An Act Providing for Charity Sweepstakes, Horse Races and Lotteries: "Sec. 4. Holding of sweepstakes. The Office shall bold charity horse race sweepstakes under such regulations as shall be promulgated by the Board in accordance with Republic Act Numbered Three hundred and nine: Provided, however, That when the holding of a sweepstakes race to determine prizes is impossible due to war, public calamity, or other unforeseen or fortuitous event or when there is no sufficient number of horses to determine the major prizes, the Board of Directors may determine the procedure to be followed in the distribution of prizes in the most just, equitable and expeditious manner. The horse races and the sale of tickets in the said sweepstakes shall be exempt from all taxes, except that each ticket shall bear a twelve-centavo internal revenue stamp. The tickets shall be printed by the Government and shall be considered government securities for the purposes of penalizing forgery or alteration." (d) Section 5 of R.A. 8756 or An Act Providing for the Terms, Conditions and Licensing Requirements of Regional or Area Headquarters, Regional Operating Headquarters, and Regional Warehouses of Multinational Companies, An;tending for the Purpose Certain Provisions of Executive Order No. 226 or The Omnibus Investments Code of 1987: Provided, That existing Regional or Area Headquarters, Regional Operating Headquarters, and Regional Warehouses of Multinational Companies enjoying the preferential income tax rate at the time of the effectivity of the TRAIN shall not be affected; (e) Section 2 of P.D. 1354, s. 1978 or Imposing Final Income Tax on Subcontractors and Alien Employees of Service Contractors and Subcontractors Engaged in Petroleum Operations in the Philippines under Presidential Decree No. 87: Provided, That service contractors and subcontractors enjoying the preferential income tax rate at the time of the effectivity of the TRAIN shall not be affected; and (f) Section 7 of P.D. 1034, s. 1976, or Authorizing the Establishment of an Offshore Banking System in the Philippines: Provided, That service contractors and subcontractors enjoying the preferential income tax rate at the time of the effectivity of the TRAIN shall not be affected. Section 87. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect on January 1, 2018 following its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation. Approved, AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL President of the Senate PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ Speaker of the House of Representatives This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 5636 and Senate Bill No. 1592 was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 13, 2017. LUTGARDO BARBO Secretary of the Senate CESAR STRAIT PAREJA Secretary General House of Representatives Approved: December 19, 2017 (Sgd.) RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE President of the Philippines"

"Republic Act No. 10931" -
"Seventeenth Congress First Regular Session Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, two thousand sixteen. REPUBLIC ACT No. 10931 AN ACT PROMOTING UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO QUALITY TERTIARY EDUCATION BY PROVIDING FOR FREE TUITION AND OTHER SCHOOL FEES IN STATE UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES, LOCAL UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES AND STATE-RUN TECHNICAL-VOCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS, ESTABLISHING THE TERTIARY EDUCATION SUBSIDY AND STUDENT LOAN PROGRAM, STRENGTHENING THE UNIFIED STUDENT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SYSTEM FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, AND APPROPRIATING FUND THEREFOR Be it enacted by the Senate House of Representatives of Philippines in Congress assembled: Section 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as the "Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act". Section 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared that quality education is an inalienable right of all Filipinos and it is the policy of the State to protect and promote the rights of all students to quality education at all levels. Therefore, the State shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all. Likewise, the State hereby recognizes the complementary roles of public and private higher education institutions and technical-vocational institutions in the educational system and the invaluable contribution that the private tertiary schools have made and will make to education. For these intents, the State shall: (a) Provide adequate funding and such other mechanisms to increase the participation rate among all socioeconomic classes in tertiary education; (b) Provide all Filipinos with equal opportunity to quality tertiary education in both the private and public educational institutions; (c) Give priority to students who are academically able and who come from poor families; (d) Ensure the optimized utilization of government resources in education; (e) Provide adequate guidance and incentives in channeling young Filipinos in their career choices and towards the proper development and utilization of human resources; and (f) Recognize the complementary roles of public and private institutions in tertiary educational system. Section 3. Definition of Terms. - As used in this Act: (a) Cost of Tertiary Education refers to (1) tuition and other school fees, (2) educational expenses and (3) the cost of living allowance; (b) Graduate courses refers to higher education programs leading to a certificate, diploma, master's or doctorate degrees, as may be authorized and recognized by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED); (c) Higher education refers to the stage of formal education, or its equivalent, requiring completion of secondary education and covering programs of study leading to bachelor and advanced degrees, including associate degrees; (d) Higher Education Institution (HEI) refers to an education institution authorized and recognized by the CHED to offer bachelor's degree or graduate courses; (e) Local universities and colleges (LUCs) refers to CHED-accredited public HEIs established by local government units (LGUs) through an enabling ordinance, financially supported by the LGU concerned, and complaint with the policies, standards and guidelines of the CHED; (f) National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR) or Listahanan 2.0 refers to the information management of the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) that identifies who and where the poor are in the country. The system makes available to national government agencies and other social protection stakeholders a database of poor families as reference in identifying potential beneficiaries of social protection programs; (g) Other education-related expenses refers to expenses related to the education of a student such as books, school supplies, uniforms, reproduction of materials, electronic devices necessary for education and other fees such as for practical teaching devices student publication, yearbook, insurance and student trust funds: (h) Other school fees refers to fees charges by HEIs and technical-vocational institutions which cover other necessary costs supportive of instructions, specifically the following: library fees, computer fees, laboratory fees, school ID fees , athletic fees, admission fees, development fees, guidance fees, handbook fees, entrance fees, registration fees, medical and dental fees, cultural fees and other similar or related fees; (i) Private higher education institution refers to HEI not not owned and controlled by the government or its instrumentalities; (j) Private technical-vocational institution refers to post-secondary technical-vocational institution run by the private sector offering programs registered with the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA); (k) Qualified student refers to any student who possesses all the qualifications under Section 4 and 5 and none of the disqualifications under Section 6 hereof; (l) State-run technical-vocational institutions refers to technical-vocational institutions operated by the TESDA or LGUs: Provided, That in the latter case, the same should be accredited by the TESDA; (m) State universities and colleges (SUCs) refers to public HEIs established by national government and are governed by their respective independent boards of trustees or regents; (n) Student loan program for tertiary education refers to a loan program established under Section 8 of this Act; (o) Technical-Vocational Education and Training (TVET) refers to the education process designed a post-secondary and lower tertiary levels, officially recognized as nondegree programs aimed at preparing technicians, paraprofessionals and other categories of middle-level workers by providing them with a board range of general education, theoretical, scientific and technological studies, and related job skills training; (p) Technical-Vocational Institutions (TVIs) refers to learning institutions offering post-secondary (TVET; (q) Tertiary education refers to the stage of education following the secondary cycle which covers post-secondary nondegree diploma, TVET, and higher education programs, including graduate education; (r) Tertiary education subsidy (TES) refers to a subsidy established under Section 7 of this Act; (s) Tuition fees refer to fees or school charges for subjects or course enrolled in by a tertiary eduaction student; (t) Undergraduate courses refers to any program leading to a degree as may be authorized and recognized by the CHED; and (u) Unified StudentFinancial Assistance System for Tertiary Education (UniFAST) refers to the harmonized, state-run and administered system of higher education and technical-vocational scholarships, grants-in-aid, student loans, and other modalities of student financial assistance program under Republic Act No. 10687. Section 4. Free Higher Education in SUCs and LUCs. - All Filipino students who are either cirrently enrolled at the time of the effectivityof this Act, or shall enroll at any time thereafter, in courses in pursuance of a bachelor's degree, certificate degree, o any comparable undergraduate degree in other school fees for units enrolled in: Provided, That they pass the entrance examination and other admission and rentention requirements of the SUCs and LUCs: Provided. Further, That all SUCs and LUCs shall create a mechanism to enable students with the financial capacity to pay for their education in the SUC and LUC to voluntarily opt out of the tuition and other school fees subsidy or make a contribution to the school. SUCs and LUCs must report the tuition payments and contributions collected from these students to the CHED: Provided, finally, That the amount required to implement the free tuition and other school fees in SUCs and LUCs shall be determined by the respective governing boards of SUCs and LUCs based on the projected number of enrollees for each academic years, which shall be the primary factor in computing the annual proposed budget of SUCs and, in the case of LUCs, the CHED for such purpose. This shall in turn serve as the baseline during the preparation of the annual National Expenditure Program (NEP) by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). Section 5. Free TVET in Post-Secondary TVIs. - All Filipino students who are currently enrolled at the time of the effectivity of this Act, or shall enroll at any time thereafter in any post-secondary TVET leading to nondegree certificate or diploma programs offered by any state-run TVI under the TESDA shall be exempt from paying tuition and other school fees: Provided, That all state-run TVIs shall create a mechanismto enable students with the financial capacity to pay for their education in the TVI to voluntarily opt out of the tuition and other school fees subsidy or make a contribution to the TVI. TVIs must report the tuition payments and contributions collected from these students. The amount required to implement the free tuition and other school fees in state-run TVIs shall be determined by the governing board of the TESDA based on the projected number of enrollees for each course, which shall be primary factor in computing for the annual proposed budget of the TESDA for such purpose. This shall in turn serve as the baseline during the preparation of the annual NEP by the DBM. Section 6. Exceptions to Free Tertiary Education. - The following students are ineligible to avail of the free tertiary education: (a) In SUCs and LUCs: (1) Students who have already attained a bachelor's degree or comparable undergraduate degree from any HEI, whether public or private: (2) Students who fail to comply with the admission and retention policies of the SUC or LUC; (3) Students who fail to complete their bachelor's degree or comparable undergraduate degree within a year after the period prescribed in their program; and (b) In State-Run TVIs: (1) Students who have obtained a bachelor's degree, as well as those who have received a certificate or diploma for a technical-vocational course equivalent to at least National Certificate III and above: (2) Students who fail in any course enrolled in during the course of the program. Students ineligible to avail of the free tertiary education shall be charged the tuition and other school fees, as determined by the respective boards of the SUCs and LUCs, and in the case of the state-run TVIs, to be determined by the TESDA. Section 7. TES for Filipino Students. - To support the cost of tertiary education or any part or portion thereof, a TES is hereby established for all Filipino students who shall enroll in undergraduate-post-secondary programs of SUCs, LUCs private HEIs and all TVIs. The TES shall be administered by the UniFAST Board and the amount necessary to fund the TES shall be included in the budgets of the CHED and the TESDA: Provided, That prioritization shall be given to students in the following order: (a) students who are part of households included in the Listahanan 2.0, ranked according to the estimated per capita household income; and (b) students not part of the Listahanan 2.0, ranked according to estimated per capita household income based on submitted documentation of proof of income to be determined by the UniFAST Board: Provided, further, That such prioritization shall not apply to Filipino students in cities and municipalities with no existing SUC or LUC campus. The TES may, among others, and to support the cost of tertiary education or any part or portion thereof, cover the following: (a) Tuition and other school fees in private HEIs, and private or LGU-operated TVIs, which shall be equivalent to the tuition and other school fees of the nearest SUC or state-run TVI in their respective areas; (b) All allowance for books, supplies transportation and miscellaneous personal expenses including a reasonable allowance for the documented rental or purchase of a personal computer or laptop and other education-related expenses: (c) An allowance for room and board costs incurred by the student; (d) For a student with a disability, an allowance for expenses related to the student's disability, an allowance for expenses related to the student's disability including special services, personal assistance, transportation, equipment, and supplies that are reasonably incurred: and (e) For a student in a program requiring professional license or certification, the one (1)-time cost of obtaining the first professional credentials or qualifications, which may include the following: application fees, notarial fees, review classes fees, insurance premium fees and documentation fees: Provided, That the amount of subsidy shall be based on the guidelines set forth by the UniFAST Board and on the annual budgetary appropriation for this purpose. Section 8. Student Loan Program for Tertiary Education. - To support further the cost of tertiary education or any part or portion thereof, a student loan program for tertiary education is hereby likewise established for all Filipino students who shall enroll in SUC, LUC, private HEI and TVET program in all TVIs registered under the TESDA. The Loan program shall be administered by the UniFAST Board and the amount necessary to fund the program shall be included in the budgets of the CHED and the TESDA: Provided, That the UniFAST may offer short-term or long-term loans: Provided, further, That those who availed of the loan during their undergraduate degree may still avail of another cycle of student loan for their pursuit of graduate studies, including medicine and law after they have fully paid the previously availed loan: Provided, furthermore, That those who did not avail of the loan program during their undergraduate studies may avail of it to pursue graduate studies including medicine and law: Provided, finally, That those who did not avail of the loan program during their undergraduate studies may avail of the loan program for their review expenses for licensure examinations administered by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC). Repayment shall be effected by the incorporating a portion of the loan amount or a percentage thereof in the employee's monthly Social Security System (SSS) or Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) contribution, as the case may be based on a reasonable schedule of repayment and interest rates. As may be formulated by the UniFAST Board. Payment of the loan amount will commence once the beneficiary secures any gainful employment with compensation, remuneration or earnings that reaches the Compulsory Repayment Threshold (CRT). For purposes of this Act, the CRT shall be set and reviewed by the UniFAST Board, and adjusted when necessary. The UniFAST Board, in consultation with relevant agencies, shall formulate loan payment guidelines for loan beneficiaries whose earnings are not covered by the GSIS or the SSS programs, including those of overseas Filipino workers (OFWs), emigrants, and self-employed persons and professionals (SEPs). Section 9. Requirements for SUCs and LUCs. - SUCs and LUCs are hereby mandated to: (a) Establish a learner information system in accordance with the guidelines to be developed by the CHED in order to facilitate the tracking of students and their performance; (b) Submit relevant information as determined by the CHED on school quality and performance; and (c) Formulate and submit to the CHED and to the Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on Universal Access to Tertiary Education created under Section 17 of this Act, a detailed SUC development plan updated every ten (10) years which shall included plans for facilities and infrastructure development and expansion. Section 10. Quality Standard for SUC and LUC Budgets, TES and Student Loan Programs. - The CHED and the TESDA shall ensure quality standards in the review and consequent endorsement of the budget of the SUCs, LUCs abd state-run TVIs, respectively. The detailed design of the TES and student loan programs shall also be subject to similar quality indicators defined by the UniFAST Board. Section 11. Prohibited Act. - Upon effectivity of this Act, it shall be unlawful for any person, SUC and state-run TVI to collect tuition and other school fees from qualified students who voluntarily opt out of the tuition and other school fees subsidy or make a contribution to the school. Section 12. Penalties. - A violation of the prohibited act under Section 11 of this Act shall be meted a penalty of imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but not more than one (1) year or a fine of not less than Twenty thousand pesos (?20,000.00) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos (?100,000.00), or both, at the discretion of the court. In case of a university, college or any other judicial entity, the penalty shall be imposed on the president, treasurer or the officer or person responsible for the violation. Section 13. Expansion of the UniFAST Board. - The UniFAST Board shall be expanded to include the following: (a) President of the Philippine Association of State Universities and Colleges as Member; (b) Chairman of the Coordinating Council of Private Educational Associations as Member; (c) President of the Association of Local Colleges and Universities as Member; (d) President of the GSIS as a nonvoting Member; and (e) President of the SSS as a nonvoting Member. The UniFAST Board is authorized to establish an enhanced organizational structure, staff development and incentives and such other administrative measures needed for the efficient discharge of tasks and commensurate to the level and scope of its responsibilities. It may tap the expertise and management services of eligible service providers subject to the appropriate guidelines promulgated by the UniFAST Board. Section 14. Reporting Requirements. - All SUCs, LUCs and state-run TVIs shall submit to the CHED and the TESDA respectively, within five (5) days after the last day of late registration for each semester, a report detailing the names of students eligible for the free tuition and other school fees in their institutions. Section 15. Appropriations. - The amounts necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act, specifically Section 4, 5, 7 and 8 shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act (GAA) and shall be appropriated under SUCs, CHED and TESDA in accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided, That an amount equivalent to not more than three percent (3%) of the TES and student loan program for tertiary education provided under this Act may be used as administrative cost under the UniFAST. Section 16. Other Sources of Funds. The national government is hereby authorized to prioritize funding this measure in negotiating and utilizing loan-term deeply concessional official development assistance (ODA). Other sources of funds such as grants, donations, collections, and other forms of assistance from local and foreign donors or other public or private entities, and other private domestic and international sources may be tapped and facilitated by the UniFAST Board to support the programs under this Act, subject to the regular auditing guidelines and procedures; Provided, That in case of donations from foreign sources, acceptance thereof shall be subject to existing government rules and regulations. Section 17. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on Universal Access to Tertiary Eduaction. There is hereby created a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee to oversee, monitor and evaluate the implementation of this Act. The Oversight Committee shall be composed of five (5) members each from the Senate and from the House of Representatives, and shall include the following: Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Education, Arts and Culture; Chairperson of the House Committee on Higher and Technical Education; Chairperson of the House Committee on Higher and Technical Education by the Senate President and the House of Representatives and in the Senate. Funding for the expenses of the Committee shall be taken from the appropriations of both the Senate and the House of Representatives. Section 18. Implementing Rules and Regulations. - Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the UniFAST Board, in consultation with the CHED, the TESDA, and other relevant stakeholders in higher and technical education, shall promulgate the implementing rules and regulation necessary to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of this Act: Provided, That the failure of the Board to promulgate the said rules and regulations shall not prevent or delay the effectivity and implementation of this Act in accordance with Section 21 hereof. Section 19. Separability Clause. - Should any part of this Act be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions hereof not affected not thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect. Section 20. Repealing Clause. - All laws, executive orders, presidential decrees, implementing rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby replealed or modified accordingly. Section 21. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazzette or in a newspaper of general circulation. Approved, (Sgd.) PANTALEON ALVAREZ Speaker of the House of Representatives (Sgd.) AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL, III President of the Senate This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1304 and House Bill No. 5633 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on May 30, 2017 and May 29, 2017, respectively. (Sgd.) CESAR STRAIT PAREJA Secretary General House of Representatives (Sgd.) LUTGARDO B. BARBO Secretary of the Senate Approved: August 3, 2017 (Sgd.) RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE President of the Philippines"

"Republic Act No. 11313" -
"Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen. REPUBLIC ACT No. 11313 An Act Defining Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Streets, Public Spaces, Online, Workplaces, and Educational or Training Institutions, Providing Protective Measures and Prescribing Penalties Therefor Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress assembled: Section 1. Short Title. -This Act shall be known as the "Safe Spaces Act". Section 2. Declaration of Policies. -It is the policy of the State to value the dignity of every human person and guarantee full respect for human rights. It is likewise the policy of the State to recognize the role of women in nation-building and ensure the fundamental equality before the law of women and men. The State also recognizes that both men and women must have equality, security and safety not only in private, but also on the streets, public spaces, online, workplaces and educational and training institutions. Section 3. Definition of Terms. -As used in this Act: (a) Catcalling refers to unwanted remarks directed towards a person, commonly done in the form of wolf-whistling and misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist slurs; (b) Employee refers to a person, who in exchange for remuneration, agrees to perform specified services for another person, whether natural or juridical, and whether private or public, who exercises fundamental control over the work, regardless of the term or duration of agreement: Provided, That for the purposes of this law, a person who is detailed to an entity under a subcontracting or secondment agreement shall be considered an employee; (c) Employer refers to a person who exercises control over an employee: Provided, That for the purpose of this Act, the status or conditions of the latters employment or engagement shall be disregarded; (d) Gender refers to a set of socially ascribed characteristics, norms, roles, attitudes, values and expectations identifying the social behavior of men and women, and the relations between them; (e) Gender-based online sexual harassment refers to an online conduct targeted at a particular person that causes or likely to cause another mental, emotional or psychological distress, and fear of personal safety, sexual harassment acts including unwanted sexual remarks and comments, threats, uploading or sharing of ones photos without consent, video and audio recordings, cyberstalking and online identity theft; (f) Gender identity and/or expression refers to the personal sense of identity as characterized, among others, by manner of clothing, inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine conventions. A person may have a male or female identity with physiological characteristics of the opposite sex in which case this person is considered transgender: (g) Public spaces refer to streets and alleys, public parks, schools, buildings, malls, bars, restaurants, transportation terminals, public markets, spaces used as evacuation centers, government offices, public utility vehicles as well as private vehicles covered by app-based transport network services and other recreational spaces such as, but not limited to, cinema halls, theaters and spas; and (h) Stalking refers to conduct directed at a person involving the repeated visual or physical proximity, non-consensual communication, or a combination thereof that cause or will likely cause a person to fear for ones own safety or the safety of others, or to suffer emotional distress. ARTICLE I GENDER-BASED STREETS AND PUBLIC SPACES SEXUAL HARASSMENT Section 4. Gender-Based Streets and Public Spaces Sexual Harassment. -The crimes of gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment are committed through any unwanted and uninvited sexual actions or remarks against any person regardless of the motive for committing such action or remarks. Gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment includes catcalling, wolf-whistling, unwanted invitations, misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic and sexist slurs, persistent uninvited comments or gestures on a persons appearance, relentless requests for personal details, statement of sexual comments and suggestions, public masturbation or flashing of private parts, groping, or any advances, whether verbal or physical, that is unwanted and has threatened ones sense of personal space and physical safety, and committed in public spaces such as alleys, roads, sidewalks and parks. Acts constitutive of gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment are those performed in buildings, schools, churches, restaurants, malls, public washrooms, bars, internet shops, public markets, transportation terminals or public utility vehicles. Section 5. Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Restaurants and Cafes, Bars and Clubs, Resorts and Water Parks, Hotels and Casinos, Cinemas, Malls, Buildings and Other Privately-Owned Places Open to the Public. -Restaurants, bars, cinemas, malls, buildings and other privately-owned places open to the public shall adopt a zero-tolerance policy against gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment. These establishments are obliged to provide assistance to victims of gender-based sexual harassment by coordinating with local police authorities immediately after gender-based sexual harassment is reported, making CCTV footage available when ordered by the court, and providing a safe gender-sensitive environment to encourage victims to report gender-based sexual harassment at the first instance. All restaurants, bars, cinemas and other places of recreation shall install in their business establishments clearly-visible warning signs against gender-based public spaces sexual harassment, including the anti-sexual harassment hotline number in bold letters, and shall designate at least one (1) anti-sexual harassment officer to receive gender-based sexual harassment complaints. Security guards in these places may be deputized to apprehend perpetrators caught in flagrante delicto and are required to immediately coordinate with local authorities. Section 6. Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Public Utility Vehicles. -In addition to the penalties in this Act, the Land Transportation Office (LTO) may cancel the license of perpetrators found to have committed acts constituting sexual harassment in public utility vehicles, and the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) may suspend or revoke the franchise of transportation operators who commit gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment acts. Gender-based sexual harassment in public utility vehicles (PUVs) where the perpetrator is the driver of the vehicle shall also constitute a breach of contract of carriage, for the purpose of creating a presumption of negligence on the part of the owner or operator of the vehicle in the selection and supervision of employees and rendering the owner or operator solidarity liable for the offenses of the employee. Section 7. Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Streets and Public Spaces Committed by Minors. -In case the offense is committed by a minor, the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) shall take necessary disciplinary measures as provided for under Republic Act No. 9344, otherwise known as the "Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006". Section 8. Duties of Local Government Units (LGUs). -local government units (LGUs) shall bear primary responsibility in enforcing the provisions under Article I of this Act. LGUs shall have the following duties: (a) Pass an ordinance which shall localize the applicability of this Act within sixty (60) days of its effectivity; (b) Disseminate or post in conspicuous places a copy of this Act and the corresponding ordinance; (c) Provide measures to prevent gender-based sexual harassment in educational institutions, such as information campaigns and anti-sexual harassment seminars; (d) Discourage and impose fines on acts of gender-based sexual harassment as defined in this Act; (e) Create an anti-sexual harassment hotline; and (f) Coordinate with the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) on the implementation of this Act. Section 9. Role of the DILG. -The DILG shall ensure the full implementation of this Act by: (a) Inspecting LGUs if they have disseminated or posted in conspicuous places a copy of this Act and the corresponding ordinance; (b) Conducting and disseminating surveys and studies on best practices of LGUs in implementing this Act; and (c) Providing capacity-building and training activities to build the capability of local government officials to implement this Act in coordination with the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW). the Local Government Academy (LGA) and the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP). Section 10. Implementing Bodies for Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Streets and Public Spaces. -The Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA), the local units of the Philippine National Police (PNP) for other provinces, and the Women and Childrens Protection Desk (WCPD) of the PNP shall have the authority to apprehend perpetrators and enforce the law: Provided, That they have undergone prior Gender Sensitivity Training (GST). The PCW. DILG and Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) shall be the national bodies responsible for overseeing the implementation of this Act and formulating policies that will ensure the strict implementation of this Act. For gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment, the MMDA and the local units of the PNP for the provinces shall deputize its enforcers to be Anti-Sexual Harassment Enforcers (ASHE). They shall be deputized to receive complaints on the street and immediately apprehend a perpetrator if caught in flagrante delicto. The perpetrator shall be immediately brought to the nearest PNP station to face charges of the offense committed. The ASHE unit together with the Womens and Childrens Desk of PNP stations shall keep a ledger of perpetrators who have committed acts prohibited under this Act for purposes of determining if a perpetrator is a first-time, second-time or third-time offender. The DILG shall also ensure that all local government bodies expedite the receipt and processing of complaints by setting up an Anti-Sexual Harassment Desk in all barangay and city halls and to ensure the set-up of CCTVs in major roads, alleys and sidewalks in their respective areas to aid in the filing of cases and gathering of evidence. The DILG, the DSWD in coordination with the Department of Health (DOH) and the PCW shall coordinate if necessary to ensure that victims are provided the proper psychological counseling support services. Section 11. Specific Acts and Penalties for Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Streets and Public Spaces. -The following acts are unlawful and shall be penalized as follows: (a) For acts such as cursing, wolf-whistling, catcalling, leering and intrusive gazing, taunting, pursing, unwanted invitations, misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist slurs, persistent unwanted comments on ones appearance, relentless requests for ones personal details such as name, contact and social media details or destination, the use of words, gestures or actions that ridicule on the basis of sex, gender or sexual orientation, identity and/or expression including sexist, homophobic, and transphobic statements and slurs, the persistent telling of sexual jokes, use of sexual names, comments and demands, and any statement that has made an invasion on a persons personal space or threatens the persons sense of personal safety  (1) The first offense shall be punished by a fine of One thousand pesos (1,000.00) and community service of twelve (12) hours inclusive of attendance to a Gender Sensitivity Seminar to be conducted by the PNP in coordination with the LGU and the PCW; (2) The second offense shall be punished by arresto menor (6 to 10 days) or a fine of Three thousand pesos (3,000.00); (3) The third offense shall be punished by arresto menor (11 to 30 days) and a fine of Ten thousand pesos (10,000.00). (b) For acts such as making offensive body gestures at someone, and exposing private parts for the sexual gratification of the perpetrator with the effect of demeaning, harassing, threatening or intimidating the offended party including flashing of private parts, public masturbation, groping, and similar lewd sexual actions  (1) The first offense shall he punished by a fine of Ten thousand pesos (10,000.00) and community service of twelve (12) hours inclusive of attendance to a Gender Sensitivity Seminar, to be conducted by the PNP in coordination with the LGU and the PCW; (2) The second offense shall be punished by arresto menor (11 to 30 days) or a fine of Fifteen thousand pesos (15,000.00); (3) The third offense shall be punished by arresto mayor (1 month and 1 day to 6 months) and a fine of Twenty thousand pesos (20,000.00). (c) For acts such as stalking, and any of the acts mentioned in Section 11 paragraphs (a) and (b), when accompanied by touching, pinching or brushing against the body of the offended person; or any touching, pinching, or brushing against the genitalia, face, arms, anus, groin, breasts, inner thighs, face, buttocks or any part of the victims body even when not accompanied by acts mentioned in Section 11 paragraphs (a) and (b)  (1) The first offense shall be punished by arresto rnenor (11 to 30 days) or a line of Thirty thousand pesos (30,000.00), provided that it includes attendance in a Gender Sensitivity Seminar, to be conducted by the PNP in coordination with the LGU and the PCW; (2) The second offense shall be punished by arresto mayor (1 month and 1 day to 6 months) or a fine of Fifty thousand pesos (50,000.00); (3) The third offense shall be punished by arresto mayor in its maximum period or a fine of One hundred thousand pesos (100,000.00). ARTICLE II GENDER-BASED ONLINE SEXUAL HARASSMENT Section 12. Gender-Based Online Sexual Harassment. -Gender-based online sexual harassment includes acts that use information and communications technology in terrorizing and intimidating victims through physical, psychological, and emotional threats, unwanted sexual misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic and sexist remarks and comments online whether publicly or through direct and private messages, invasion of victims privacy through cyberstalking and incessant messaging, uploading and sharing without the consent of the victim, any form of media that contains photos, voice, or video with sexual content, any unauthorized recording and sharing of any of the victims photos, videos, or any information online, impersonating identities of victims online or posting lies about victims to harm their reputation, or filing, false abuse reports to online platforms to silence victims. Section 13. Implementing Bodies for Gender-Based Online Sexual Harassment. -For gender-based online sexual harassment, the PNP Anti-Cybercrime Group (PNPACG) as the National Operational Support Unit of the PNP is primarily responsible for the implementation of pertinent Philippine laws on cybercrime, shall receive complaints of gender-based online sexual harassment and develop an online mechanism for reporting real-time gender-based online sexual harassment acts and apprehend perpetrators.1phi1 The Cybercrime Investigation and Coordinating Center (CICC) of the DICT shall also coordinate with the PNPACG to prepare appropriate and effective measures to monitor and penalize gender-based online sexual harassment. Section 14. Penalties for Gender-Based Online Sexual Harassment. -The penalty of prision correccional in its medium period or a fine of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (100,000.00) but not more than Five hundred thousand pesos (500,000.00), or both, at the discretion of the court shall be imposed upon any person found guilty of any gender-based online sexual harassment. If the perpetrator is a juridical person, its license or franchise shall be automatically deemed revoked, and the persons liable shall be the officers thereof, including the editor or reporter in the case of print media, and the station manager, editor and broadcaster in the case of broadcast media. An alien who commits gender-based online sexual harassment shall be subject to deportation proceedings after serving sentence and payment of fines. Exemption to acts constitutive and penalized as gender-based online sexual harassment are authorized written orders of the court for any peace officer to use online records or any copy thereof as evidence in any civil, criminal investigation or trial of the crime: Provided, That such written order shall only be issued or granted upon written application and the examination under oath or affirmation of the applicant and the witnesses may produce, and upon showing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that gender-based online sexual harassment has been committed or is about to be committed, and that the evidence to be obtained is essential to the conviction of any person for, or to the solution or prevention of such crime. Any record, photo or video, or copy thereof of any person that is in violation of the preceding sections shall not be admissible in evidence in any judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or administrative hearing or investigation. ARTICLE III QUALIFIED GENDER-BASED STREETS, PUBLIC SPACES AND ONLINE SEXUAL HARASSMENT Section 15. Qualified Gender-Based Streets, Public Spaces and Online Sexual Harassment. -The penalty next higher in degree will be applied in the following cases: (a) If the act takes place in a common carrier or PUV, including, but not limited to, jeepneys, taxis, tricycles, or app-based transport network vehicle services, where the perpetrator is the driver of the vehicle and the offended party is a passenger; (b) If the offended party is a minor, a senior citizen, or a person with disability (PWD), or a breastfeeding mother nursing her child; (c) If the offended party is diagnosed with a mental problem tending to impair consent; (d) If the perpetrator is a member of the uniformed services, such as the PNP and the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), and the act was perpetrated while the perpetrator was in uniform; and (e) If the act takes place in the premises of a government agency offering frontline services to the public and the perpetrator is a government employee. ARTICLE IV GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN THE WORKPLACE Section 16. Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in the Workplace. -The crime of gender-based sexual harassment in the workplace includes the following: (a) An act or series of acts involving any unwelcome sexual advances, requests or demand for sexual favors or any act of sexual nature, whether done verbally, physically or through the use of technology such as text messaging or electronic mail or through any other forms of information and communication systems, that has or could have a detrimental effect on the conditions of an individuals employment or education, job performance or opportunities; (b) A conduct of sexual nature and other conduct-based on sex affecting the dignity of a person, which is unwelcome, unreasonable, and offensive to the recipient, whether done verbally, physically or through the use of technology such as text messaging or electronic mail or through any other forms of information and communication systems; (c) A conduct that is unwelcome and pervasive and creates an intimidating, hostile or humiliating environment for the recipient: Provided, That the crime of gender-based sexual harassment may also be committed between peers and those committed to a superior officer by a subordinate, or to a teacher by a student, or to a trainer by a trainee; and (d) Information and communication system refers to a system for generating, sending, receiving, storing or otherwise processing electronic data messages or electronic documents and includes the computer system or other similar devices by or in which data are recorded or stored and any procedure related to the recording or storage of electronic data messages or electronic documents. Section 17. Duties of Employers. -Employers or other persons of authority, influence or moral ascendancy in a workplace shall have the duty to prevent, deter, or punish the performance of acts of gender-based sexual harassment in the workplace. Towards this end, the employer or person of authority, influence or moral ascendancy shall: (a) Disseminate or post in a conspicuous place a copy of this Act to all persons in the workplace; (b) Provide measures to prevent gender-based sexual harassment in the workplace, such as the conduct of anti-sexual harassment seminars; (c) Create an independent internal mechanism or a committee on decorum and investigation to investigate and address complaints of gender-based sexual harassment which shall: (1) Adequately represent the management, the employees from the supervisory rank, the rank-and-file employees, and the union, if any; (2) Designate a woman as its head and not less than half of its members should be women; (3) Be composed of members who should be impartial and not connected or related to the alleged perpetrator; (4) Investigate and decide on the complaints within ten (10) days or less upon receipt thereof; (5) Observe due process; (6) Protect the complainant from retaliation; and (7) Guarantee confidentiality to the greatest extent possible; (d) Provide and disseminate, in consultation with all persons in the workplace, a code of conduct or workplace policy which shall: (1) Expressly reiterate the prohibition on gender-based sexual harassment; (2) Describe the procedures of the internal mechanism created under Section 17(c) of this Act; and (3) Set administrative penalties. Section 18. Duties of Employees and Co-Workers. -Employees and co-workers shall have the duty to: (a) Refrain from committing acts of gender-based sexual harassment; (b) Discourage the conduct of gander-based sexual harassment in the workplace; (c) Provide emotional or social support to fellow employees, co-workers, colleagues or peers who are victims of gender-based sexual harassment; and (d) Report acts of gender-based sexual harassment witnessed in the workplace. Section 19. Liability of Employers. In addition to liabilities for committing acts of gender-based sexual harassment, employers may also be held responsible for: (a) Non-implementation of their duties under Section 17 of this Act, as provided in the penal provisions; or (b) Not taking action on reported acts of gender-based sexual harassment committed in the workplace. Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Five thousand pesos (5,000.00) nor more than Ten thousand pesos (10,000.00). Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Ten thousand pesos (10,000.00) nor more than Fifteen thousand pesos (15,000.00). Section 20. Routine Inspection. -The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) for the private sector and the Civil Service Commission (CSC) for the public sector shall conduct yearly spontaneous inspections to ensure compliance of employers and employees with their obligations under this Act. ARTICLE V GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS Section 21. Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Educational and Training Institutions. All schools, whether public or private, shall designate an officer-in-charge to receive complaints regarding violations of this Act, and shall, ensure that the victims are provided with a gender-sensitive environment that is both respectful to the victims needs and conducive to truth-telling. Every school must adopt and publish grievance procedures to facilitate the filing of complaints by students and faculty members. Even if an individual does not want to file a complaint or does not request that the school take any action on behalf of a student or faculty member and school authorities have knowledge or reasonably know about a possible or impending act of gender-based sexual harassment or sexual violence, the school should promptly investigate to determine the veracity of such information or knowledge and the circumstances under which the act of gender-based sexual harassment or sexual violence were committed, and take appropriate steps to resolve the situation. If a school knows or reasonably should know about acts of gender-based sexual harassment or sexual violence being committed that creates a hostile environment, the school must take immediate action to eliminate the same acts, prevent their recurrence, and address their effects. Once a perpetrator is found guilty, the educational institution may reserve the right to strip the diploma from the perpetrator or issue an expulsion order. The Committee on Decorum and Investigation (CODI) of all educational institutions shall address gender-based sexual harassment and online sexual harassment in accordance with the rules and procedures contained in their CODI manual. Section 22. Duties of School Heads. -School heads shall have the following duties: (a) Disseminate or post a copy of this Act in a conspicuous place in the educational institution; (b) Provide measures to prevent gender-based sexual harassment in educational institutions, like information campaigns; (c) Create an independent internal mechanism or a CODI to investigate and address complaints of gender-based sexual harassment which shall: (1) Adequately represent the school administration, the trainers, instructors, professors or coaches and students or trainees, students and parents, as the case may be; (2) Designate a woman as its head and not less than half of its members should be women; (3) Ensure equal representation of persons of diverse sexual orientation, identity and/or expression, in the CODI as far as practicable; (4) Be composed of members who should be impartial and not connected or related to the alleged perpetrator; (5) Investigate and decide on complaints within ten (10) days or less upon receipt, thereof; (6) Observe due process; (7) Protect the complainant from retaliation; and (8) Guarantee confidentiality to the greatest extent possible. (d) Provide and disseminate, in consultation with all persons in the educational institution, a code of conduct or school policy which shall: (1) Expressly reiterate the prohibition on gender-based sexual harassment; (2) Prescribe the procedures of the internal mechanism created under this Act; and (3) Set administrative penalties. Section 23. Liability of School Heads. In addition to liability for committing acts of gender-based sexual harassment, principals, school heads, teachers, instructors, professors, coaches, trainers, or any odier person who has authority, influence or moral ascendancy over another in an educational or training institution may also be held responsible for: (a) Non-implementation of their duties under Section 22 of this Act, as provided in the penal provisions; or (b) Failure to act on reported acts of gender-based sexual harassment committed in the educational institution. Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Five thousand pesos (5,000.00) nor more than Ten thousand pesos (10,000.00). Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Ten thousand pesos (10,000.00) nor more than Fifteen thousand pesos (15,000.00). Section 24. Liability of Students. Minor students who are found to have committed acts of gender-based sexual harassment shall only be held liable for administrative sanctions by the school as stated in their school handbook. Section 25. Routine Inspection. The Department of Education (DepEd), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) shall conduct regular spontaneous inspections to ensure compliance of school heads with their obligations under this Act. ARTICLE VI COMMON PROVISIONS Section 26. Confidentiality. At any stage of the investigation, prosecution and trial of an offense under this Act, the rights of the victim and the accused who is a minor shall be recognized. Section 27. Restraining Order. Where appropriate, the court, even before rendering a final decision, may issue an order directing the perpetrator to stay away from the offended person at a distance specified by the court, or to stay away from the residence, school, place of employment, or any specified place frequented by the offended person. Section 28. Remedies and Psychological Counselling. A victim of gender-based street, public spaces or online sexual harassment may avail of appropriate remedies as provided for under the law as well as psychological counselling services with the aid of the LGU and the DSWD, in coordination with the DOH and the PCW. Any fees to be charged in the course of a victims availment of such remedies or psychological counselling services shall be borne by the perpetrator. Section 29. Administrative Sanctions. Above penalties are without prejudice to any administrative sanctions that may be imposed if the perpetrator is a government employee. Section 30. Imposition of Heavier Penalties. Nothing in this Act shall prevent LGUs from coming up with ordinances that impose heavier penalties for the acts specified herein. Section 31. Exemptions. Acts that are legitimate expressions of indigenous culture and tradition, as well as breastfeeding in public shall not be penalized. ARTICLE VII FINAL PROVISIONS Section 32. PNP Women and Childrens Desks. The women and childrens desks now existing in all police stations shall act on and attend to all complaints covered under this Act. They shall coordinate with ASHE officers on the street, security guards in privately-owned spaces open to the public, and anti-sexual harassment officers in government and private offices or schools in the enforcement of the provisions of this Act. Section 33. Educational Modules and Awareness Campaigns. The PCW shall take the lead in a national campaign for the awareness of the law. The PCW shall work hand-in-hand with the DILG and duly accredited womens groups to ensure all LGUs participate in a sustained information campaign and the DICT to ensure an online campaign that reaches a wide audience of Filipino internet-users. Campaign materials may include posters condemning different forms of gender-based sexual harassment, informing the public of penalties for committing gender-based sexual harassment, and infographics of hotline numbers of authorities. All schools shall educate students from the elementary to tertiary level about the provisions of this Act and how they can report cases of gender-based streets, public spaces and online sexual harassment committed against them. School courses shall include age-appropriate educational modules against gender-based streets, public spaces and online sexual harassment which shall be developed by the DepEd, the CHED, the TESDA and the PCW. Section 34. Safety Audits. -LGUs are required to conduct safety audits every three (3) years to assess the efficiency and effectivity of the implementation of this Act within their jurisdiction. Such audits shall be multisectoral and participatory, with consultations undertaken with schools, police officers, and civil society organizations. Section 35. Appropriations. Such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be indicated under the annual General Appropriations Act (GAA). National and local government agencies shall be authorized to utilize their mandatory Gender and Development (GAD) budget, as provided under Republic Act No. 9710, otherwise known as "The Magna Carta of Women" for this purpose. In addition, LGUs may also use their mandatory twenty percent (20%) allocation of them annual internal revenue allotments for local development projects as provided under Section 287 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991". Section 36. Prescriptive Period. Any action arising from the violation of any of the provisions of this Act shall prescribe as follows: (a) Offenses committed under Section 11(a) of this Act shall prescribe in one (1) year; (b) Offenses committed under Section 11(b) of this Act shall prescribe in three (3) years; (c) Offenses committed under Section 11(c) of this Act shall prescribe in ten (10) years; (d) Offenses committed under Section 12 of this Act shall be imprescriptible; and (e) Offenses committed under Sections 16 and 21 of this Act shall prescribe in five (5) years. Section 37. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee. There is hereby created a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee to monitor the implementation of this Act and to review the implementing rules and regulations promulgated. The Committee shall be composed of five (5) Senators and five (5) Representatives to be appointed by the Senate President and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, respectively. The Oversight Committee shall be co-chaired by the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on Women, Children. Family Relations and Gender Equality and the House Committee on Women and Gender Equality. Section 38. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the PCW as the lead agency, in coordination with the DILG, the DSWD, the PNP, the Commission on Human Rights (CHR), the DOH, the DOLE, the DepEd, the CHED, the DICT, the TESDA, the MMDA, the LTO, and at least three (3) womens organizations active on the issues of gender-based violence, shall formulate the implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of this Act. Section 39. Separability Clause. If any provision or part hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting. Section 40. Repealing Clause. Any law, presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order, rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly. Section 41. Effectivity. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in any two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines. Approved, (Sgd) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO Speaker of the House of Representatives (Sgd) VICENTE C. SOTTO III President of the Senate This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1558 and House Bill No. 8794 was passed by the Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives on February 6, 2019. (Sgd) DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING Acting Secretary General House of Representatives (Sgd.) MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA Secretary of the Senate (Sgd) RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE President of the Philippines Approved: April 17, 2019."
